0 The Sooty Albatross, Dark-mantled Sooty Albatross or Dark-mantled Albatross, Phoebetria fusca, is a species of bird in the albatross family.
0 They breed on sub-Antarctic islands and range at sea across the Southern Ocean from South America to Australia.
0 Sooty Albatrosses are a type of Albatross that belong to Diomedeidae family and come from the Procellariiformes order, along with Shearwaters, Fulmars, Storm-petrels, and Diving-petrels.
0 They share certain identifying features.
0 First, they have nasal passages that attach to the upper bill called naricorns.
0 Although the nostrils on the Albatross are on the sides of the bill.
0 The bills of Procellariiformes are also unique in that they are split into between 7 and 9 horny plates.
0 Finally, they produce a stomach oil made up of wax esters and triglycerides that is stored in the proventriculus.
0 This is used against predators as well as an energy rich food source for chicks and for the adults during their long flights.
0 They also have a salt gland that is situated above the nasal passage and helps desalinate their bodies, due to the high amount of ocean water that they imbibe.
0 It excretes a high saline solution from their nose.
1 The Sooty Albatross is a medium sized albatross and measures about 85cm, with a 2m wingspan.
1 Adult body mass ranges from 2.1 to 3.4kg.
1 It is sooty-brown with darker shading on the sides of its head.
1 It has a white crescent above and behind its eye.
1 Its bill is black with an orange or yellow sulcus.
1 The tail of this albatross is wide diamond shaped.
1 Juveniles are similar to adults.
0 Their diet consists of squid, crustaceans, cephalopods, fish, and carrion.
0 The Sooty Albatross is a colonial bird; however not to the degree of other Albatrosses, as their colonies usually consist of 50 to 60 pair.
0 They will build their nests on cliffs and steep slopes.
0 Whereas they can mate annually they only do so biennially.
0 This albatross nests on islands in the southern Atlantic Ocean and Indian Ocean .
0 They forage in both oceans north to about 30°S.
0 The IUCN ranks the Sooty Albatross as endangered with an occurrence range of 40800000km2sqmi and a breeding range of 1900km2sqmi.
0 A 1998 estimate place the population at 42,000 adult birds.
0 Populations have been shrinking 75% over the last 90 years; although the rate of reduction has recently slowed.
0 The 21st century has seen stable populations at Gough Island.
0 This species is not overly affected by longline fisheries, but instead by domestic cats eating eggs and chicks on Amsterdam Island and the Kerguelen Islands.
0 Avian cholera, pasteurellosis, and erysipelas are major threats.
0 Illegal poaching has nearly ceased.
0 Studies and surveys are conducted to assist in slowing its demise.
0 It is a protected species on the Tristan da Cunha group, Gough Island is a World Heritage Site, and Prince Edward Island, Gough Island, and Inaccessible Island in the Tristan da Cunha group are protected nature preserves.
0 Also, in 2007, the Crozet Islands, Amsterdam Island, and the Kerguelen Islands were declared nature preserves.