0 The Rhinoceros Auklet is a seabird and a close relative of the puffins.
0 It is the only living species of the genus Cerorhinca.
0 Given its close relationship with the puffins, the common name Rhinoceros Puffin has been proposed for the species.
0 It ranges widely across the North Pacific, feeding on small fish and nesting in seabird colonies.
0 Its name is derived from a horn-like extension of the beak.
0 This horn is only present in breeding adults, and like the elaborate sheath on the bill of puffins is shed every year.
0 The Rhinoceros Auklet , is a medium-sized auk with a large, strong, orange/brown bill .
0 The plumage is dark on top and paler below; breeding adults possess white plumes above the eyes and behind the bill.
0 Males are slightly larger than females .
0 The Rhinoceros Auklet is a North Pacific auk that breeds from California to the Aleutian Islands in Alaska in North America; and Hokkaidō and Honshū, Japan, as well as North Korea and Sakhalin Island in Asia.
0 It winters both in offshore and inshore waters, exhibiting some migration.
0 The Rhinoceros Auklet nests in burrows dug into the soil, or in natural caves and cavities between 1 and 5 m deep.
0 It prefers nesting sites on slight inclines to aid take-off, as it is a poor flier.
0 A single egg is incubated by both parents for 45 days.
0 The semiprecocial chick is then fed each night with a bill full of fish for 50 days; this nocturnal behaviour is believed to be a response to predation and kleptoparasitism by gulls.
0 At sea, Rhinoceros Auklets feed on fish, with some krill and squid taken also.
0 They feed inshore during the breeding season in the midwater.
0 To catch their prey, they dive as deeply as 57 meters for as long as 148 seconds.
0 The genus Cerorhinca evolved in the North Pacific, apparently in the mid-late Miocene.
0 Although today only one species remains, it used to be much more diverse, both in number of species and in distribution.
0 Fossils have been found as far south as Baja California.
0 The first record of the clade from the Atlantic Ocean was reported by Smith et al.
0 and suggests that the biogeographic history of Cerorhinca is more complex than previously thought.
0 Known prehistoric species are: