0 The Gray-crowned Rosy Finch, or Gray-crowned Rosy-finch, is a species of passerine bird in the family Fringillidae native to Alaska, western Canada, and the north-western United States.
0 Due to its remote and rocky alpine habitat it is rarely seen.
0 There are currently six recognized subspecies.
0 It is one of four species of rosy-finches.
0 The Gray-crowned Rosy Finch was first classified by English ornithologist William John Swainson in 1832.
0 This bird has been thought to form a superspecies with three other Rosy Finches : Black Rosy Finch and the Brown-capped Rosy Finch , all of which were classified as the same species as the Asian Rosy Finch from 1983-1993.
0 Recent mitochondrial DNA evidence shows the rosy finches are all indeed very closely related and can be easily confused with one another.
0 Along with four Asian rosy finches, the three North American rosy finches form the mountain finch genus Leucosticte.
0 Alternate common names include: Roselin à tête grise , Schwarzstirn-Schneegimpel , and Pinzón Montano Nuquigrí .
0 Six subspecies of the Gray-crowned Rosy Finch are now recognized, though proposals for additional subspecies have been recognized.
1 Within the finch family, the Gray-crowned Rosy Finch is medium-large with a comparatively long notched tail and wing.
1 Adults are brown on the back and breast and mainly pink on the rest of the underparts and the wings.
1 The forehead and throat are black; the back of the head is grey.
1 They have short black legs and a long forked tail.
1 There is some variability in the amount of grey on the head.
1 Adult females and juveniles are similar.
1 Overall length is 140 to 160mm, wingspan 33mm, and weight 22 to 26g.
1 L. t. wallowa has an almost entirely gray head.
1 The Pribilof and Aleutian subspecies have a length of 170 to 210mm and weight of 42 to 60g, about twice the size of the other subspecies.
1 The Black Rosy Finch has a black instead of brown body and the Brown-capped Rosy Finch is a lighter brown and lacks the gray face patch.
0 The ancestor of the three species of North American rosy finches migrated from Asia.
0 All rosy finches live in an alpine or tundra environment.
0 The Gray-crowned Rosy Finch has a wide range and large numbers throughout Alaska, and western Canada and the United States.
0 L. t. griseonucha permanently resides in the Aleutian Islands and umbrina on the Pribilof Islands.
0 A small number of Gray-crowned Rosy Finches winters on the mainland in South-Cenral Alaska and visits feeders there.
0 The other taxa: littoralis, tephrocotis, wallowa, and dawsoni are found from the Canadian and American Rockies and migrate south to the western United States.
0 L. t. tephrocotis summers from Montana to the Yukon, while littoralis breeds closer to the coast, from northern California to west-central Alaska.
0 Due to its remote habitat, few of its nests have been found, it is rarely spotted, and the population is stable.
0 They are invariably found amongst rocks.
0 The areas the subspecies breed in rarely overlap during breeding season.
0 Males typically outnumber females throughout the year.
0 Rosy finches are very environment-specific.
0 In the summer their breeding habitat is rocky islands and barren areas on mountains from Alaska to the northwestern United States.
0 These mountain breeding areas tend to be snowfields and rocky scree.
0 When not breeding they form large flocks of over 1000 individuals which are sometimes known to include Snow Buntings , Lapland Longspurs , and Horned Larks , as well as other rosy-finch species.
0 They descend in flocks as far as the fringes of the western plains beginning in autumn when the snows get deep.
0 They return to alpine regions when snow is still deep in early spring.
0 They may breed at a higher altitude than any other breeding bird in North America.
0 Due to these extreme breeding altitudes, they are very difficult to observe during breeding times.
0 They build a cup nest in mid-June at a sheltered, hidden location on the ground or on a cliff and are monogamous.
0 They are known to use protected areas such as mine shafts and abandoned buildings for nesting.
0 Both sexes collect the nesting material of grass, roots, lichen, moss, and sedge, but only the female builds the nest.
0 Lining material consists of fine grass, hair, and feathers.
0 Females lay 3-5 eggs which she incubates for approximately two weeks.
0 Both sexes feed the chicks, which leave the nest after 2-3 weeks.
0 Chicks continue to be fed by their parents for about two weeks after leaving the nest in late July or early August.
0 A male will defend its female's territory during breeding season, not just the nest but where ever she goes.
0 This behavior is common with the rosy finches.
0 These birds forage on the ground; many fly to catch insects in flight.
0 During the summer they mainly eat insects, such as cutworms, that were caught in updrafts and frozen in snowfields.
0 They also feed in the meadows near snowfields.
0 In the winter they eat seeds from weeds and grasses such as Russian thistle , mustard, and sunflower .
0 When breeding, both males and females develop throat pouches, known as gular pouches or gular skin, to carry food to their chicks, a trait seen in only one other North American genus, Pinicola.
0 The three subspecies that live in mountain interiors have brown cheeks instead of gray cheeks.
0 They show little fear of humans.
0 They often feed in small flocks.
0 Their call is a buzz-sounding "chew".
0 They can be approached to within 1 to 2m.