0 The Pied-billed Grebe is a species of the grebe family of water birds.
0 Since the Atitlán Grebe, Podilymbus gigas, has become extinct, it is the sole extant member of the genus Podilymbus.
1 The Pied-billed Grebe is small, stocky, and short-necked.
1 It is 31-38cm in length, it has a wingspan of 45-62cm and weighs 253-568g.
1 It is usually brown or gray in color.
1 It has a short, blunt chicken-like bill, which in summer is encircled by a broad black band .
1 It is the only grebe that does not show a white wing patch in flight.
1 The sexes are monomorphic .
1 Pied-billed Grebes feed mainly on aquatic invertebrates, and also on small fish and amphibians .
1 Pied-billed Grebes have been shown to eat their own feathers to aid in digestion .
0 The Pied-billed Grebe breeds in south-central Canada, throughout the United States, Central America, the Caribbean, and temperate South America.
0 It creates an open bowl type nest in a platform of floating vegetation, loosely anchored by the cattails to float with the waves.
0 When it leaves its nest it covers its eggs with vegetation.
0 After a period of time the vegetation will stain the eggs and help conceal them better.
0 Pied-billed Grebes are year-round residents in much of their range, though populations that breed in areas where their habitat freezes in winter migrate to warmer regions.
0 Although this species does not appear to be a strong flier, it has occurred in Europe as a rare vagrant on a number of occasions, and one bird in England bred with a Little Grebe, producing hybrid young.
0 The most widespread of North American grebes, it is found on many open waters, such as remote ponds, marshes, and sluggish streams.
0 It is usually the first grebe to arrive on northern inland waters in springtime, and the last to leave in autumn.
0 It is rare on salt water.
0 Podilymbus is a contraction of Latin podicipes —the origin of the name of the grebe order—and Ancient Greek kolymbos, "diver"; podiceps, "rump-headed", from podici- + New Latin ceps.
0 This grebe is usually silent, except in breeding season when the male voices a loud, laughing cuck, cuck, cuck or cow, cow, cow.
0 It rarely flies, preferring to escape danger by diving.
0 Folk names of this grebe include dabchick, devil-diver, dive-dapper, hell-diver, and water witch.