0 The Ruby-throated Hummingbird , is a small hummingbird.
0 It is the only species of hummingbird that regularly nests east of the Mississippi River in North America.
1 The Ruby-throated Hummingbird is 7–9 cm long with an 8–11 cm wingspan, and weighs about 3 g.
1 Adults are metallic green above and greyish white below, with near-black wings.
1 Their bill is long, straight and very slender.
1 The species is dimorphic.
1 The adult male, shown in the photo, has a ruby red throat patch which may appear black in some lighting, and a dark forked tail.
1 The female has a dark rounded tail with white tips and generally no throat patch, though she may sometimes have a light or whitish throat patch.
1 The male is smaller than the female, and has a slightly shorter beak.
1 A molt of feathers occurs once a year, and begins during the autumn migration.
0 The breeding habitat is throughout most of eastern North America and the Canadian prairies, in deciduous and pine forests and forest edges, orchards, and gardens.
0 The female builds a nest in a protected location in a shrub or a tree.
0 The Ruby-throated Hummingbird is migratory, spending most of the winter in southern Mexico, Central America as far south as South America, and the West Indies.
0 It breeds throughout the eastern United States, east of the 100th meridian, and in southern Canada in eastern and mixed deciduous forest.seen mostly in winter, in mexico.
0 Ruby-throated hummingbirds are solitary.
0 Adults of this species typically only come into contact for the purpose of mating, and both males and females of any age aggressively defend feeding locations within their territory.
0 The aggressiveness becomes most pronounced in late summer to early fall as they fatten up for migration.
0 This is important because, as part of their migration, they must fly across the Gulf of Mexico - a feat which long confounded scientists, as a 500-mile, non-stop flight over water would seemingly require a caloric energy that far exceeds an adult hummingbird's body weight of 3 grams.
0 However, researchers discovered the tiny birds can nearly double their body mass in preparation for their Gulf crossing.
0 The additional mass, stored as fat, provides enough energy for the birds to achieve this amazing flight.
0 They feed frequently while active during the day and when temperatures drop, particularly on cold nights, they may conserve energy by entering hypothermic torpor.
0 Due to their small size, they are vulnerable to insect-eating birds and animals.
0 Hummingbirds have many skeletal and flight muscle adaptations which allow the bird great agility in flight.
0 Muscles make up 25-30% of their body weight, and they have long, blade-like wings that, unlike the wings of other birds, connect to the body only from the shoulder joint.
0 This adaptation allows the wing to rotate almost 180°, enabling the bird to fly not only forward but fly backwards, and to hover in front of flowers as it feeds on nectar and insects.
0 During hovering, ruby-throated hummingbird wings beat 55 times per second, 61 times per second when moving backwards, and up to 75 times per second when moving forward.
0 Nectar from flowers and flowering trees, as well as small insects and spiders, are its main food.
0 Small arthropods are a more important part of adult hummingbirds' diet than has generally been recognized.
0 Their diet may also occasionally include tree sap taken from sapsucker wells.
0 Hummingbirds show a slight preference for red, tubular flowers as a nectar source.
0 The birds feed from flowers using a long extendendable tongue, and catch insects on the wing or glean them from flowers, leaves, bark, and even from spider's webs.
0 Young birds are fed insects for protein since nectar is an insufficient source of protein for the growing birds.
0 Ruby-throated hummingbirds are thought to be polygynous.
0 Polyandry and polygynandry may also occur.
0 They do not form breeding pairs, and females provide all parental care.
0 Males arrive at the breeding area in the spring, and establish a territory before the females arrive.
0 When the females return, males court females that enter their territory by performing courtship displays.
0 They perform a “dive display” rising 8 – 10 feet above and 5 – 6 feet to each side of the female.
0 If the female perches, the male begins flying in very rapid horizontal arcs less than 0.5 m in front of her.
0 The male's wings may beat up to 200 times per second during these displays .
0 If the female is receptive to the male, she may give a call and assume a solicitous posture with her tail feathers cocked and her wings drooped.
0 ''Preceding copulation, male and female face each other, alternately ascend about 10 feet and descend, eventually dropping to the ground and copulating.
0 The nest is constructed on a small, downward-sloping tree limb 10–20 feet above the ground.
0 It is composed of bud scales, with lichen on the exterior, bound with spider's silk, and lined with plant down .
0 Old nests may be occupied for several seasons, but are repaired annually.
0 The female constructs the nest, as the male has left by this point.
0 Females lay two white eggs about 12.9 by 8.5 millimeters in size, and produce 2, or occasionally 3 broods.
0 They brood the chicks and feed them from 1 to 3 times every hour by regurgitation, usually while the female is hovering.
0 When they are 22 to 25 days old, the young leave the nest..
0 The vocalizations of Ruby-throated Hummingbirds are rapid, squeaky chirps, and are used primarily for threats.
0 For example, males may vocalize to warn another male that has entered his territory.