0 The Shore Lark , called the Horned Lark in North America, is a species of bird in the genus Eremophila.
1 Unlike most other larks, this is a distinctive-looking species on the ground, mainly brown-grey above and pale below, with a striking black and yellow face pattern.
1 The summer male has black "horns", which give this species its American name.
1 America has a number of races distinguished by the face pattern and back color of males, especially in summer.
1 The southern European mountain race Eremophila alpestris penicillata is greyer above, and the yellow of the face pattern is replaced with white.
1 Vocalizations are high-pitched, lisping or tinkling, and weak.
1 The song, given in flight as is common among larks, consists of a few chips followed by a warbling, ascending trill.
0 The Shore Lark breeds across much of North America from the high Arctic south to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, northernmost Europe and Asia and in the mountains of southeast Europe.
0 There is also an isolated population on a plateau in Colombia.
0 It is mainly resident in the south of its range, but northern populations of this passerine bird are migratory, moving further south in winter.
0 This is a bird of open ground.
0 In Eurasia it breeds above the tree line in mountains and the far north.
0 In most of Europe, it is most often seen on seashore flats in winter, leading to the European name.
0 In the UK it can be found as a winter stopover along the coasts and in eastern England although a mated pair have been recently spotted in Windmill End nature reserve in the West Midlands.
0 In America, where there are no other larks to compete with, it's also found on farmland, on prairies, in deserts, on golf courses and airports, and the like.
0 Breeding The nest is on the ground, with 2-5 eggs being laid.
0 Food is seeds supplemented with insects in the breeding season.
0 The nest may be near corn or soybeans for a source of food, and the female chooses the site.
0 In the open areas of western North America, Horned Larks are among the bird species most often killed by wind turbines.