0 The Yellow-billed Cuckoo, Coccyzus americanus, is a cuckoo.
0 Common folk-names for this bird in the southern United States are Rain Crow and Storm Crow.
0 These likely refer to the bird's habit of calling on hot days, often presaging thunderstorms.
1 Adults have a long tail, brown above and black-and-white below, and a black curved bill with yellow especially on the lower mandible.
1 The head and upper parts are brown and the underparts are white.
1 There is a yellow ring around the eye.
1 It shows cinnamon on the wings in flight.
1 Juveniles are similar, but the black on the undertail is replaced by gray.
1 This bird has a number of calls; the most common is a rapid ka ka ka ka ka kow kow kow.
1 There is an ongoing debate regarding the taxonomic status of the western race and if it is distinct from those birds in the east.
1 This question is significant to the conservation status of this species in the west, where it has declined to a tiny fraction of its population a century ago.
1 Populations of this species in western North America are in steep decline.
1 The bird disappeared from British Columbia, Washington, and Oregon during the first half of the twentieth century.
1 Eastern populations have declined as well, though not as precipitously.
0 Their breeding habitat is deciduous woods from southern Canada to Mexico.
0 They migrate to Central America and as far south as northern Argentina.
0 This bird is a rare vagrant to western Europe.
0 These birds forage in dense shrubs and trees, also may catch insects in flight.
0 They mainly eat insects, especially tent caterpillars and cicadas, but also some lizards, eggs of other birds and berries.
0 They nest in a tree or shrub, usually up to 2–12 feet above the ground.
0 The nest is a flimsy platform of short twigs placed on a horizontal branch.
0 The 3-4 eggs are incubated for 14 days or less.
0 The chicks are able to climb about with agility at 7–9 days of age.
0 At about this same time, the feathers of the chicks burst out of their sheaths and the young are able to fly.
0 The entire time from egg-laying to fledging may be as little as 17 days.
0 Yellow-billed Cuckoos occasionally lay eggs in the nests of other birds , but they are not obligate brood parasites of other birds as is the Common Cuckoo of Eurasia.