0 The Scissor-tailed Flycatcher is a long-tailed insectivorous bird of the genus, whose members are collectively referred to as kingbirds.
0 The kingbirds are a group of large insectivorous birds in the tyrant flycatcher family.
0 The scissor-tailed flycatcher is found in North and Central America.
0 Its former Latin name was Muscivora forficata.
0 The former genus name, Muscivora, derives from the Latin word for "fly" and "to devour" , while the species name forficata derives from the Latin word for "scissors" .
0 The scissortail now is considered to be a member of the Tyrannus, or "tyrant-like" genus.
0 This genus earned its name because several of its species are extremely aggressive on their breeding territories, where they will attack larger birds such as crows, hawks and owls.
1 Adult birds have pale gray heads and upper parts, light underparts, salmon-pink flanks, and dark gray wings.
1 Their extremely long, forked tails, which are black on top and white on the underside, are characteristic and unmistakable.
1 At maturity, the bird may be up to 14.5in in length.
1 Immature birds are duller in color and have shorter tails.
1 A lot of these birds have been reported to be more than 40 cm.
1 They build a cup nest in isolated trees or shrubs, sometimes using artificial sites such as telephone poles near towns.
1 The male performs a spectacular aerial display during courtship with his long tail forks streaming out behind him.
1 Both parents feed the young.
1 Like other kingbirds, they are very aggressive in defending their nest.
1 Clutches contain three to six eggs.
1 Scissor-tailed flycatchers feed mainly on insects , which they may catch by waiting on a perch and then flying out to catch them in flight .
1 They also eat some berries.
1 Their breeding habitat is open shrubby country with scattered trees in the south-central states of Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas; western portions of Louisiana, Arkansas, and Missouri; far eastern New Mexico; and northeastern Mexico.
1 Reported sightings record occasional stray visitors as far north as southern Canada and as far east as Florida and Georgia.
1 They migrate through the Gulf states of Mexico to their winter non-breeding range, from southern Mexico to Panama.
1 Pre-migratory roosts and flocks flying south may contain as many as 1,000 birds.
1 The scissor-tailed flycatcher is the state bird of Oklahoma, and is displayed in flight with tail feathers spread on the reverse of the Oklahoma Commemorative Quarter.