0 The California Gull Larus californicus is a medium-sized gull, smaller on average than the Herring Gull but larger on average than the Ring-billed Gull, though may overlap in size greatly with both.
1 Adults are similar in appearance to the Herring Gull, but have a smaller yellow bill with a black ring, yellow legs, brown eyes and a more rounded head.
1 The body is mainly white with grey back and upper wings.
1 They have black primaries with white tips.
1 Immature birds are also similar in appearance to immature Herring Gulls, with browner plumage than immature Ring-billed Gulls.
1 Length can range from 46 to 55cm, the wingspan 122-137cm and body mass can vary from 430 to 1045g.
1 Their breeding habitat is lakes and marshes in interior western North America from Northwest Territories, Canada south to eastern California and Colorado .
1 They nest in colonies, sometimes with other birds.
1 The nest is a shallow depression on the ground lined with vegetation and feathers.
1 The female usually lays 2 or 3 eggs.
1 Both parents feed the young birds.
1 They are migratory, most moving to the Pacific coast in winter.
1 It is only then that this bird is regularly found in western California .
1 These birds forage in flight or pick up objects while swimming, walking or wading.
1 They mainly eat insects, fish and eggs.
1 They also scavenge at garbage dumps or docks.
1 They may follow plows in fields for insects stirred up by this activity.
1 Seagulls are known to be extremely annoying and a nuisance to residents of California, particularly beach goers and students in school campuses.
1 It is not uncommon for a flock of seagulls to harass students and their food on a daily basis.
1 Thus, the seagull has earned a very bad reputation among students and residents alike.
1 This is the state bird of Utah, remembered for assisting Mormon settlers in dealing with a plague of Mormon crickets.
1 A monument in Salt Lake City commemorates this event, known as the "Miracle of the Gulls".
0 There are two subspecies recognized, the nominate from the Great Basin to central Montana and Wyoming, and the slightly larger, paler L. c. albertaensis with a more northerly distribution, ranging from Great Slave Lake onto the Great Plains of western Manitoba and South Dakota .
0 Although these subspecies are not well distinguishable by mtDNA allozyme variation , they breed true and the low genetic divergence can be explained by separation during the Pleistocene and renewed contact in Montana during more recent times .
0 In California, the California Gull recently held the protected status California Species of Special Concern due to declining numbers at their historic California breeding colony at Mono Lake.
0 However, in recent decades this species has begun to breed in the southern portion of San Francisco Bay, where it did not historically breed, and has undergone exponential population growth.
0 These California Gulls now inhabit large, remote salt-production ponds and levees and have a very large food source provided by nearby landfills from San Francisco, San Jose and other urban areas, all the way up into the Sacramento area.
0 The South Bay California Gull population has grown from less than 1,000 breeding birds in 1982 to over 33,000 in 2006.
0 This population boom has resulted in large resident flocks of gulls that will opportunistically prey on other species, particularly the eggs and nestlings of other birds.
0 Seriously threatened birds that share the same South Bay habitat include the Snowy Plover and California Least Tern, while less-threatened birds including Black-necked Stilts, American Avocets, Forster's Terns, and Caspian Terns are also preyed upon by the abnormally large flocks of California Gulls.
0 Efforts are underway to reduce habitat for this species and find other ways to disperse the large numbers of gulls.