0 The White-throated Kingfisher also known as the White-breasted Kingfisher or Smyrna Kingfisher, is a tree kingfisher, widely distributed in Eurasia from Bulgaria, Turkey, east through South Asia to the Philippines.
0 This kingfisher is a resident over much of its range, although some populations may make short distance movements.
0 It can often be found well away from water where it feeds on a wide range of prey that includes small reptiles, amphibians, crabs, small rodents and even birds.
0 During the breeding season they call loudly in the mornings from prominent perches including the tops of buildings in urban areas or on wires.
1 This is a large kingfisher, 28 cm in length.
1 The adult has a bright blue back, wings and tail.
1 Its head, shoulders, flanks and lower belly are chestnut, and the throat and breast are white.
1 The large bill and legs are bright red.
1 The flight of the White-throated Kingfisher is rapid and direct, the short rounded wings whirring.
1 In flight, large white patches are visible on the blue and black wings.
1 Sexes are similar, but juveniles are a duller version of the adult.
1 This species forms a superspecies with Halcyon cyanoventris and most major works recognize four geographic races.
1 They vary clinally in size, the shades of blue on the mantle which is more greenish in smyrnensis and fusca and more blue or purplish in saturatior.
1 smyrnensis is found in Turkey, Northern and Central Israel, Egypt, Iraq, Pakistan, Afghanistan and northwestern India fusca is found in India, Sri Lanka, South China, Taiwan, Sumatra and West Java.
1 Population from Burma to the Greater Sundas were treated under the name perpulchra but are now lumped into fusca.
1 South China and Taiwanese populations are sometimes treated as subspecies fokiensis.
1 saturatior Hume, 1874 is found in the Andaman Islands.
1 gularis is found in the Philippines.
1 H. s. gularis of the Philippines has only the neck and throat white.
1 Race fusca is found in Peninsular India and Sri Lanka and is slightly smaller, bluer and with a darker brown underside than the nominate race found in northwestern India.
1 Race saturatior is found in the Andaman Islands and is larger with darker brown underparts.
1 Race perpulchra is found in northeastern India and is smaller than fusca with paler underparts.
1 Albinism has been noted on occasion.
1 The English of White-throated was introduced since the range is large and geographic adjectives would make the name too restrictive, while the older name of White-breasted would not describe the eastern race which has only the throat white.
1 The call of this kingfisher is a chuckling chake-ake-ake-ake-ake.
1 They are particularly noisy in the breeding season.
1 Local names include Baluchistan: Aspi chidok; Sindhi: Dalel; Hindi: Kilkila, Kourilla;Himachal Pradesh: Neela machhrala; Punjabi: Wadda machhera; Bengali: Sandabuk machhranga; Assamese: Masroka; Cachar: Dao natu gophu; Gujarati: Kalkaliyo, Safedchati kalkaliyo; Marathi: Khandya; Tamil: Vichuli; Telugu: Lakmuka, Buchegadu; Malayalam: Ponman; Kannada: Rajamatsi; Sinhalese: Pilihuduwa.
0 White-throated Kingfisher is a common species of a variety of habitats, mostly open country in the plains with trees, wires or other perches.
0 The range of the species is expanding.
0 This kingfisher is widespread and populations are not threatened.
0 Average density of 4.58 individuals per km2.
0 has been noted in the Sundarbans mangroves.
0 Feeding and diet It perches conspicuously on wires or other exposed perches within its territory, and is a frequent sight in south Asia.
0 This species mainly hunts large crustaceans, insects, earthworms, rodents, snakes, fish and frogs.
0 Predation of small birds such as the Oriental White-eye, chick of a Red-wattled Lapwing, sparrows and munias have been reported.
0 The young are fed mostly on invertebrates.
0 In captivity, it has been noted that it rarely drinks water although bathing regularly.
0 Breeding The White-throated Kingfisher begins breeding at the onset of the Monsoons.
0 Males perch on prominent high posts in their territory an call in the early morning.
0 The tail may be flicked now and in its courtship display the wings are stiffly flicked open for a second or two exposing the white wing mirrors.
0 They also raise their bill high and display the white throat and front.
0 The female in invitation makes a rapid and prolonged kit-kit-kit... call.
0 The nest is a tunnel in an earth bank.
0 The nest building begins with both birds flying into a suitable mud wall until an indentation is made where they can find a perch hold.
0 They subsequently perch and continue digging the nest with their bills.
0 Nest tunnels in a haystack have also been recorded.
0 A single clutch of 4-7 round white eggs is typical.
0 The eggs take 2022 days to hatch while the chicks fledge in 19 days.
0 Movements Birds have sometimes been seen attracted to lights at night, especially during the monsoon season, suggesting that they are partly migratory.
0 Mortality With a powerful bill and rapid flight, these kingfishers have few predators when healthy and rare cases of predation by a Black Kite and a Jungle Crow may be of sick or injured birds.
0 An individual found dead with its beak embedded into the wood of a tree has been suggested as an accident during rapid pursuit of prey, possibly an Oriental White-eye.
0 A few parasites have been noted.
0 In the 1800s these birds were hunted for their bright feathers that were used to adorn hats.