0 Not to be confused with Eastern Meadowlark The Western Meadowlark is a medium-sized icterid bird, about 8.5 in long.
0 It nests on the ground in open country in western and central North America.
0 It feeds mostly on insects, but also seeds and berries.
0 It has distinctive calls described as watery or flute-like, which distinguish it from the closely related Eastern Meadowlark.
1 Adults have yellow underparts, with a black "V" on the breast, and white flanks which are streaked with black.
1 Their upper parts are mostly brown, but also have black streaks.
1 These birds have long pointed bills and their heads are striped with light brown and black.
0 Their breeding habitats are grasslands, prairies, pastures, and abandoned fields, all of which may be found from across western and central North America to northern Mexico.
0 Where their range overlaps with the eastern species, these birds prefer thinner, drier vegetation; the two types of birds generally do not interbreed but do defend territory against one another.
0 Their nests are situated on the ground, and are covered with a roof woven from grass.
0 There may be more than one nesting female in a male's territory.
0 Their nests are sometimes destroyed by mowing operations with eggs and young in them.
0 Western Meadowlarks will interbreed with Eastern Meadowlarks where their ranges overlap; however, resulting young appear to have low fertility.
0 Western Meadowlarks are permanent residents throughout much of their range.
0 Northern birds may migrate to the southern parts of their range; some birds also move east in the southern United States.
0 These birds forage on the ground or in low to semi-low vegetation.
0 They sometimes search for food by probing with their bills.
0 They mainly eat insects, although they will devour seeds and berries.
0 In winter, these birds often feed in flocks.
0 These birds have a flute-like warbled song.
0 These calls contrast with the simple, whistled call of the Eastern Meadowlark.
0 These two species were considered to be the same species for some time; the western species, having been overlooked for some time, was given the species name neglecta.
0 This is the state bird of Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oregon and Wyoming.
0 Only the Northern Cardinal is the state bird of more states.