0 The Orchard Oriole, Icterus spurius, is the smallest North American species of icterid blackbird.
0 The subspecies of the Caribbean coast of Mexico, I. s. fuertesi, is sometimes considered a separate species, the Ochre Oriole.
1 This species is 6.3 inches long and weighs 20 g.
1 The bill is pointed and black with some blue-gray at the base of the lower mandible .
1 The adult male of the nominate subspecies has chestnut on the underparts, shoulder, and rump, with the rest of the plumage black.
1 In the subspecies I. s. fuertesi, the chestnut is replaced with ochre .
1 The adult female and the juvenile of both subspecies have olive-green on the upper parts and yellowish on the breast and belly.
1 All adults have pointed bills and white wing bars.
1 One-year-old males are yellow-greenish with a black bib.
0 The breeding habitat is semi-open areas with deciduous trees.
0 I. s. spurius breeds in spring across eastern North America from near the United States-Canada border south to central Mexico.
0 A 2009 study also found breeding in the thorn forest of Baja California Sur and the coast of Sinaloa during the summer "monsoon"; this region had previously been thought to be only a migratory stopover .
0 I. s. fuertesi breeds from southern Tamaulipas to Veracruz .
0 These birds enjoy living in shaded trees within parks along lakes and streams.
0 The nest is a tightly woven pouch attached to a fork on a horizontal branch.
0 Their nests tend to sit close together.
0 The nominate subspecies' winter range extends from the coastal lowlands of central Sinaloa and southern Veracruz south to northern Colombia and northwestern Venezuela .
0 The ochre subspecies has been observed in winter on the Pacific slope of Mexico .
0 Nominate Orchard Orioles depart from their winter habitats in March and April and arrive in their breeding habitats from late April to late May.
0 Usually, they leave their breeding territories in late July and early August and arrive on their winter territories in mid August.
0 These birds are nocturnal migrants.
0 While in breeding season, they eat insects and spiders.
0 When the season changes, their diet also includes ripe fruit, which quickly passes through their digestive tract.
0 During the winter, their diet consists of fruit, nectar,and insects.
0 When in flight, Orchard Orioles generally swoop close to the ground and fly at or below treetop level During courtship, females display themselves in 3 unique ways.
0 The first way is bowing their head and torso toward the male.
0 Seesawing, the second courtship display, involves repetitively alternating lowering and raising the head and tail.
0 The third display is begging, which is fast-paced fluttering of wings halfway extended, followed by a high whistle.
0 The specific name spurius refers to the original misidentification of the male as a female Baltimore Oriole.
0 These birds are sometimes mistakenly identified as New World warblers.