0 The roadrunners are two species of bird in the genus Geococcyx of the cuckoo family, Cuculidae, native to North and Central America.
0 These two species are the ground foraging cuckoos.
0 Roadrunner species generally range in size from 18in to 24in from tail to beak.
0 The roadrunner is a large, slender, black-brown and white streaked ground bird with a distinctive head crest.
0 It has long legs, strong feet, and an oversized dark bill.
0 The tail is broad with white tips on the three outer tail feathers.
0 The bird has a bare patch of skin behind each eye; this patch is shaded blue anterior to red posterior.
0 The lesser roadrunner is slightly smaller, not as streaky, and has a smaller bill.
0 The bird is terrestrial; although capable of flight, it spends most of its time on the ground.
0 During flight, the wings are short and rounded and reveal a white crescent in the primary feathers.
0 Roadrunners and other members of the cuckoo family have zygodactyl feet .
0 Roadrunners can run at speeds of up to 20 miles per hour and generally prefer sprinting to flying.
0 Roadrunners will fly to escape predators.
0 The roadrunner has a dove-like "coo" that is slow and descending.
0 It also makes a rapid, vocalized clattering sound with its beak.
0 Ogg vorbis file of clattering sound made with beak.
0 The roadrunner is an inhabitant of the deserts of the Southwestern United States, Mexico, and Central America.
0 Roadrunners are omnivores and are opportunistic.
0 Their diet normally consists of insects , small reptiles , rodents and small mammals, tarantulas, scorpions, centipedes, spiders, snails, small birds, eggs, nestlings, and fruits and seeds like prickly pear cactus and sumac.
0 The lesser roadrunner eats mainly insects.
0 Roadrunners forage on the ground and, when hunting, usually run after prey from under cover.
0 They may leap to catch insects, and commonly batter certain prey, such as snakes, against the ground.
0 Geococcyx is the only real predator of the tarantula hawk wasps.
0 Roadrunners are commonly solitary birds or live in pairs.
0 They are monogamous and a pair may mate for life.
0 Pairs may hold a territory all year.
0 During the courtship display, the male bows, alternately lifting and dropping his wings and spreading his tail.
0 He parades in front of the female with his head high and his tail and wings drooped.
0 It has also been documented that the male may bring an offering of food to the female.