0 The Le Conte’s Sparrow, Ammodramus leconteii, is one of the smallest sparrow species in North America.
0 It is a very secretive bird that prefers to spend most of its time on the ground under the cover of tall grasses.
0 They are typically very difficult to flush, often only flushing at a distance of 1–3 m as they prefer to run across the ground.
0 When they do emerge they rarely fly more than a foot or two above the grass and often descend again within a few meters.
0 Because it is so rarely seen, there are still many gaps in knowledge about the Le Conte’s Sparrow.
0 Nests are often very hard to find, and individuals are more often identified by sound than by sight.
1 The Le Conte’s Sparrow is a small sparrow with a relatively large head, short gray bill and short pointed tail.
1 It has a buffy yellow-orange face with gray cheeks, and a dark brown crown with a white central stripe.
1 The nape of the neck is lilac gray with chestnut streaks, and the back is streaked with brown and beige.
1 Its belly is off white, while the breast and sides are a buffy orange-yellow with dark brown streaks.
1 The feet and legs are a brownish-pink color.
1 The measurements for both sexes are:
0 The Le Conte's Sparrow is commonly mistaken for:
0 There has been a recorded case of a Le Conte's Sparrow hybridized with a Nelson's Sparrow, in June 1949 in Ontario.
0 The Le Conte’s Sparrow is a member of the Order Passerifomes, which are the perching birds, sometimes less accurately referred to as the songbirds.
0 It is from the Family Emberizidae, which is characterized by species of small birds with bills adapted to seed eating.
0 Most members of this family are referred to as Sparrows in North America and as Buntings in Europe.
0 Within the sparrows, the Le Conte’s falls within the Genus Ammodramus, which are the ground loving sparrows, which prefer staying in tall, thick grasses to perching on trees.
0 All of the species for which the Le Conte’s is most easily confused belong to this Genus.
0 The Le Conte’s Sparrow was discovered by John James Audubon, and it was thought that he named this bird after a friend, Doctor Le Conte.
0 It is generally believed that he meant John Lawrence Le Conte, although some feel that he was referring to another John Le Conte, also a doctor, and John Lawrence's cousin.