0 The Savannah Sparrow is a small American sparrow.
0 It is the only widely accepted member of the genus Passerculus.
0 Recent comparison of mtDNA NADH dehydrogenase subunit 2 and 3 sequences indicates that the Ipswich Sparrow, formerly usually considered a good species , is a well-marked subspecies of the Savannah Sparrow, whereas the southwestern subspecies should be recognized as distinct species Large-billed Sparrow .
0 It is named after Savannah, Georgia where one of the first specimens of this bird was collected.
0 This passerine bird breeds in Alaska, Canada, northern, central and Pacific coastal USA, Mexico and Guatemala.
0 The Pacific and Mexican breeders are resident, but other populations are migratory, wintering from the southern United States across Central America and the Caribbean to northern South America.
0 It is a very rare vagrant to western Europe.
1 This species has a typically sparrow-like dark-streaked brown back, and whitish underparts with brown or blackish breast and flank streaking.
1 It has whitish crown and supercilium stripes, sometimes with some yellow .
1 The cheeks are brown and the throat white.
1 The flight feathers are blackish-brown with light brown or white border.
1 The eyes are dark.
1 The feet and legs are horn-colored, as is the lower part of the bill, with the upper part being dark grey.
1 The Savannah Sparrow is a very variable species, with numerous subspecies, several of which have been split as separate species at various times.
1 The different forms vary principally in the darkness of the plumage.
1 The variation generally follows Gloger's Rule, with Alaskan and interior races the palest, and southwestern coastal forms the darkest.
1 There are some exceptions though, most conspicuously in some island populations which presumably were strongly affected by founder effects.
1 The general pattern of variation has a fairly clear divide, southwest of which the birds become notably darker; this agrees quite well with the limit between P. sandwichensis and P. rostratus.
1 The Savannah Sparrows proper are very similar and migrant birds can not usually be related to a breeding population with certainty.
1 The resident or partially migratory subspecies are well distinguishable by size and, particularly between groups, coloration.
0 These birds forage on the ground or in low bushes; particularly in winter they are also found in grazed low-growth grassland.
0 They mainly eat seeds, but insects are also eaten in the breeding season.
0 They are typically encountered as pairs or family groups in the breeding season, and assemble in flocks for the winter migration.
0 The flight call is a thin seep.
0 Sensu lato, the Savannah Sparrow is considered a threatened species by the IUCN.
0 The song is mixture of chirps and trills.
0 Seventeen subspecies are currently recognized, though many are only described from wintering birds and a lot of the variation seems to be clinal.
0 Four additional subspecies are not generally accepted anymore.
0 The subspecies are usually divided into several groups: All are migratory; wintering ranges overlap widely.
0 P. s. wetmorei is a doubtful subspecies which may breed in the mountains of Guatemala.
0 It is known from only 5 specimens, collected June 11–17, 1897, in Huehuetenango Department.
0 Some post-breeding dispersal.
0 Formerly considered a distinct species.
0 The Large-billed Sparrows proper are 2-3 dark, large and strong-billed subspecies: The Belding's Sparrows are all-year residents of salt marshes of the Californian Pacific coast.
0 They are dark, rufous, and have rather long but not very hefty bills.
0 The San Benito Sparrow is a resident bird of the Islas San Benito off Baja California; a stray bird was observed on Cedros Island on April 21, 1906.