0 The White-throated Sparrow is a passerine bird of the American sparrow family Emberizidae.
1 The White-throated Sparrow is a passerine bird of the American sparrow family Emberizidae.
1 The White-throated Sparrow is 17 cm in length with a wingspan of 23 cm Typical weight is 26 grams .
1 There are two adult plumage variations known as the tan-striped and white-striped forms.
1 On the white-striped form the crown is black with a white central stripe.
1 The supercilium is white as well.
1 The auriculars are gray with the upper edge forming a black eye line.
1 On the tan form, the crown is dark brown with a tan central stripe.
1 The supercilium is tan as well.
1 The auriculars are gray/light brown with the upper edge forming a brown eye line.
1 Both variations feature dark eyes, a white throat, yellow lores and gray bill.
1 There is variation and some individuals may show dark lateral stripes of each side of the throat.
1 They almost always pair with the opposite color morph for breeding.
1 The two color morphs occur in approximately equal numbers.
1 Both male and female white-striped birds are more aggressive than tan-striped birds during the breeding season.
1 The breast has gray/tan streaks and the streaks continue down the flanks but the belly is generally light gray.
1 The wings are rufous with two distinct white wing bars.
1 Sexes are morphologically similar.
0 White-throated Sparrows breed in central Canada and New England.
0 They nest either on the ground under shrubs or low in trees in deciduous or mixed forest areas and lay 3-5 brown-marked blue or green-white eggs.
0 In winter, it migrates to the southern and eastern USA.
0 It stays year round in the atlantic provinces of Canada.
0 This bird is a rare vagrant to western Europe.
0 These birds forage on the ground under or near thickets or in low vegetation.
0 They mainly eat seeds, insects and berries, and are attracted to bird feeders.
0 There are at least two distinct songs sung by this species.
0 One consists of an initial note, followed by three or so repeated notes at an interval of about a major third above.
0 The second song consists of an initial note, a second a whole step lower, and a third note, repeated 2-3 times, about a minor third below that.
0 This second song is commonly described by use of mnemonics with the cadence of "Po-or Sam Peabody, Peabody, Peabody" The rhythm is very regular, and the timbre could be described as pinched.
0 These musical intervals are only approximate; to a human ear the song often sounds out of tune.
0 The repeated note will often change in pitch very slightly, contributing to this effect.
0 The White-throated Sparrow also has at least two calls, in addition to its song.