0 The Sand Martin is a migratory passerine bird in the swallow family.
0 It has a wide range in summer, embracing practically the whole of Europe and the Mediterranean countries, part of northern Asia and also North America.
0 It winters in eastern and southern Africa, South America and South Asia.
1 It is known as Bank Swallow in North America, and as Collared Sand Martin in South Asia, and sometimes as European Sand Martin
1 The 12 cm long Sand Martin is brown above, white below with a narrow brown band on the breast; the bill is black, the legs brown.
1 The young have rufous tips to the coverts and margins to the secondaries.
1 Its brown back, white throat, small size and quick jerky flight separate it at once from similar swallows, such as the House Martin , the Cliff Swallow or other species of Riparia.
1 Only the Banded Martin of sub-Saharan Africa is similar, but the Sand Martin only occurs there in winter.
1 The Pale Martin is the subspecies diluta of northern India and southeastern China is sometimes split as a separate species Riparia diluta.
1 It has paler grey-brown upperparts and a less distinct breast band.
1 It winters in Pakistan and southern India.
1 The Sand Martin's twittering song is continuous when the birds are on the wing, and becomes a conversational undertone after they have settled in the roost.
1 The harsh alarm is heard when a passing falcon, crow or other suspected predator requires combined action to drive it away.
0 This species was first described by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae in 1758, and originally named Hirundo riparia; the description consisted of the simple H cinerea, gula abdomineque albis"an ash-grey swallow, with white throat and belly"and the type locality was simply given as "Europa".
0 The specific name means "of the riverbank"; it is derived from the Latin ripa "riverbank".
0 Linnaeus already remarked on this species' breeding habits: Habitat in Europae collibus arenosis abruptis, foramine serpentino "it lives in Europe, in winding holes in sheer sandy hills".
0 It is generally found near larger bodies of water, such as rivers, lakes or even the ocean, throughout the year.
0 The Sand Martin appears on its breeding grounds as the first of its family, starting towards the end of March, just in advance of the Barn Swallow.
0 In northern Ohio, they arrive in numbers by mid-April in our time, about 10 days earlier than they did 100 years ago.
0 At first, they flit over the larger bodies of water alone, in search of early flies.
0 Later parties accompany other swallow species, but for a time, varying according to weather, the birds remain at these large waters and do not visit their nesting haunts.
0 The Sand Martin departs early, at any rate from its more northerly haunts.
0 In August, the gatherings at the nightly roost increase enormously, though the advent and departure of passage birds causes great irregularity in numbers.
0 They are essentially gone from their breeding range by the end of September.
0 The food consists of small insects, mostly gnats and other flies whose early stages are aquatic.
0 The Sand Martin is sociable in its nesting habits; from a dozen to many hundred pairs will nest close together, according to available space.
0 The nests are at the end of tunnels of from a few inches to three or four feet in length, bored in sand or gravel.
0 The actual nest is a litter of straw and feathers in a chamber at the end of the burrow; it soon becomes a hotbed of parasites.
0 Four or five white eggs are laid about mid-late May, and a second brood is usual in all but the most northernly breeding sites.
0 This is not a rare bird, and it is classified as a species of Least Concern by the IUCN.