0 The Cliff Swallow is a member of the passerine bird family Hirundinidae — the swallows and martins.
0 It breeds in North America, and is migratory, wintering in western South America from Venezuela southwards to northeast Argentina.
0 This species is a very rare vagrant to western Europe.
1 This bird averages 13 cm long with a tiny bill.
1 The adult Cliff Swallow has an iridescent blue back and crown, brown wings and tail, and buff rump.
1 The nape and forehead are white.
1 The underparts are white except for a red face.
1 The tail is square-ended.
1 Young birds are essentially brown above and whitish below, except for the buff rump and dark face.
1 The only confusion species is the closely related Cave Swallow, which is richer in colour and has a cinnamon rump and forehead.
0 Like all swallows and martins, Cliff Swallows subsist primarily on a diet of insects which are caught in flight.
0 Cliff Swallows breed in large colonies.
0 They build conical mud nests and lay 3-6 eggs.
0 The natural nest sites are on cliffs, preferably beneath overhangs, but as with the Eurasian House Martin, man-made structures are now the principal locations for breeding.
0 Female Cliff Swallows are known to lay eggs in and move previously laid eggs into the nests of other birds within the colony.
0 This species has always been plentiful in the west of North America, where there are many natural sites, but the abundance in the east has varied.
0 European settlement provided many new nest sites on buildings, but the population declined in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as the supply of unpainted barns declined.
0 There has been a subsequent revival as dams and bridges have provided suitable sites.
0 These are the famous swallows whose return from Villa Ventana, Argentina every year to the Mission San Juan Capistrano in California on March 19 is celebrated with a festival.
0 In recent years, the swallows have failed to return to the Mission.
0 The "Capistrano Swallows" are now nesting in the Chino Hills of Southern California, north of San Juan Capistrano.
0 Thousands of the small birds, up from 'wintering' in Argentina, have built their mud nests in the eaves of the Vellano Country Club, with community buildings situated around a golf course in the Chino Hills.
0 Suggestions: It would be a good idea to display "Protected Wildlife" signs, where migratory birds nest under the bridges and other public places.