0 The Tree Swallow, Tachycineta bicolor, is a migratory passerine bird that breeds in North America and winters in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean.
0 It is a very rare vagrant to western Europe.
0 This swallow averages 13.5 cm long and weighs about 20 g. The bill is tiny.
0 The adult Tree Swallow has iridescent blue-green upperparts, white underparts, and a very slightly forked tail.
0 The female usually has duller colours than the male, often more greenish than the more bluish male.
0 The juvenile plumage is dull grey-brown above and may have hint of a gray breast band.
0 Being highly social outside of the breeding season, tree swallows may form flocks of several thousand birds near roost sites.
0 Flocks near Vacherie, Louisiana were estimated to contain well over 1 million birds during December 2009.
0 Tree Swallows nest in natural or artificial cavities near water and are often found in large flocks.
0 They readily use nest boxes, including those built for bluebirds.
0 Declines in cavity-builder populations are resulting in fewer natural nesting sites for Tree Swallows, although the swallow population remains healthy.
0 The Tree Swallow nest consists of multiple layers of grasses and thin twigs, and is lined with large feathers from other species.
0 The female lays 4 to 7 white eggs and incubates them by herself.
0 The eggs hatch in about 14 days and the hatchlings are altricial.
0 The hatchlings typically fledge in 16–24 days.
0 While there are young or eggs in the nest, adults frequently dive bomb intruders and attempt to drive them from the area.
0 Tree Swallows are known to "fight" over feathers in mid-air for reasons which are still under investigation.
0 There is some speculation that this is a form of play.
0 Tree Swallows are typically single-brooded, although they may attempt a second nest if the first fails early in the season.
0 There are records of parents raising two successful broods in a season.
0 They subsist primarily on a diet of insects, sometimes supplemented with small quantities of fruit.
0 They are excellent fliers and take off from their perch and acrobatically catch insects in their bills in mid-air.