0 The Caspian Tern is a species of tern, with a subcosmopolitan but scattered distribution.
0 Despite its extensive range, it is monotypic of its genus, and has no subspecies accepted either.
0 In New Zealand it is also known by the Maori name Taranui.
1 It is the world's largest tern with a length of 48–56 cm, a wingspan of 127–140 cm and a weight of 574–782g.
1 Adult birds have black legs, and a long thick red-orange bill with a small black tip.
1 They have a white head with a black cap and white neck, belly and tail.
1 The upper wings and back are pale grey; the underwings are pale with dark primary feathers.
1 In flight, the tail is less forked than other terns and wing tips black on the underside.
1 In winter, the black cap is still present , but with some white streaking on the forehead.
1 The call is a loud heron-like croak.
0 Their breeding habitat is large lakes and ocean coasts in North America , and locally in Europe , Asia, Africa, and Australasia .
0 North American birds migrate to southern coasts, the West Indies and northernmost South America.
0 European and Asian birds spend the non-breeding season in the Old World tropics.
0 African and Australasian birds are resident or disperse over short distances.
0 The global population is about 50,000 pairs; numbers in most regions are stable, but the Baltic Sea population is declining and of conservation concern.
0 The Caspian Tern is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds applies.
0 They feed mainly on fish, which they dive for, hovering high over the water and then plunging.
0 They also occasionally eat large insects, the young and eggs of other birds and rodents.
0 They may fly up to 60 km from the breeding colony to catch fish; it often fishes on freshwater lakes as well as at sea.
0 Breeding is in spring and summer, with one to three pale blue green eggs, with heavy brown spotting, being laid.
0 They nest either together in colonies, or singly in mixed colonies of other tern and gull species.
0 The nest is on the ground among gravel and sand, or sometimes on vegetation; incubation lasts for 26–28 days.
0 The chicks are variable in plumage pattern, from pale creamy to darker grey-brown; this variation assists adults in recognizing their own chicks when returning to the colony from feeding trips.
0 Fledging occurs after 35–45 days.