0 The Brown Thrasher , sometimes erroneously called the Brown Thrush, is a bird in the Mimidae family, a group that also includes the New World catbirds and mockingbirds.
1 The Brown Thrasher is bright reddish-brown above with thin, dark streaks on its buffy underparts.
1 Its long, rufous tail is rounded with paler corners, and eyes are a brilliant gold.
1 Adults average about 11.5in long with a wingspan of 13in, and have an average mass of 2.4oz.
0 It is found in thickets and dense brush, often searching for food in dry leaves on the ground.
0 It also enjoys the convergence of mowed to unmowed lawns, particularly if there are ample shrubs or shrubby trees, i.e., fruit orchards that the undergrowth is left undisturbed.
0 It also enjoys perennial gardens and can be seen jumping from the ground to catch insects on flowers and foliage.
0 Its breeding range includes the United States and Canada east of the Rocky Mountains.
0 It is a partial migrant, with northern birds wintering in the southern USA, where it occurs throughout the year.
0 There is a single British record of this unlikely transatlantic vagrant.
0 This bird is omnivorous, eating insects, berries, nuts and seeds, as well as earthworms, snails, and sometimes lizards.
0 The female lays 3 to 5 eggs in a twiggy nest lined with grass.
0 The nest is built in a dense shrub or low in a tree.
0 Both parents incubate and feed the young.
0 These birds raise two or three broods in a year.
0 They are able to call in up to 3000 distinct songs.
0 The male sings a series of short repeated melodious phrases from an open perch to defend his territory and is also very aggressive in defending the nest.
0 Brown Thrashers are known to have as many as over 3000 unique songs in their vocal repertoire.
0 Although this bird is widespread and still common, it has declined in numbers in some areas due to loss of suitable habitat.
0 The Brown Thrasher is the official state bird of Georgia, and was the inspiration for the name of Atlanta's former National Hockey League team, the Atlanta Thrashers.