0 The Cerulean Warbler, Dendroica cerulea, is a small songbird of the New World warbler family.
1 Adult males have pale cerulean blue upperparts and white underparts with a black necklace across the breast; they also have black streaks on the back and flanks.
1 Females and immature birds have greyer or greenish upperparts, a pale stripe over the eye, and no streaking on the back and no necklace.
1 All of these birds, regardless of their age, have wing bars and a thin pointed bill.
0 Their breeding habitats are mature deciduous forests in eastern North America.
0 They migrate to spend the boreal winter in forested mountain areas in South America.
0 They forage actively high in trees, sometimes catching insects in flight.
0 These birds mainly eat insects.
0 Their nests are cup-shaped, and are placed on a horizontal branch high in a hardwood tree.
0 The song is a buzzed zray zray zray zray zeeee.
0 The call is a slurred chip.
0 The Cerulean Warbler is the fastest declining neotropical migrant songbird.
0 Among the many threats they face, their wintering habitat in the northern Andes is dwindling rapidly.
0 Cerulean Warblers depend on shade coffee plantations during the winter.
0 This traditional farming technique is at risk as coffee prices fluctuate and pressure to switch to higher-yield sun coffee or other crops intensifies.
0 In fragmented forest areas, this bird is vulnerable to nest parasitism by the Brown-headed Cowbird.
0 This bird's numbers are declining faster than any other warbler species in the USA; its population nowadays is less than one-fifth of what it was 40 years ago .
0 The American Bird Conservancy is working with its Colombian partner, Fundación ProAves, to protect wintering habitat for Cerulean Warblers and other migrating songbirds.
0 Together they have created the Cerulean Warbler Bird Reserve, the first protected area created for a neotropical migrant.
0 In an effort to advance protection of the Cerulean Warbler, ABC and its South American partners , in 2009 produced a Cerulean Warbler Wintering Ground Conservation Plan.
0 Cerulean Warbler has been recorded as a vagrant to Iceland.
0 John James Audubon illustrates the Cerulean Warbler in Birds of America as Plate 48 where two birds are shown perched in a Bear Berry bush.
0 The image was engraved and colored by Robert Havell's London workshops.
0 The original watercolor by Audubon was purchased by the New York History Society where it remains to this day .
0 Jonathan Franzen uses the Cerulean Warbler as a plot device in his 2010 novel, Freedom.