0 The Chestnut-sided Warbler is a New World warbler.
0 They breed in eastern North America and in southern Canada westwards to the Canadian Prairies.
0 They also breed in the Great Lakes region and in the eastern USA.
0 These birds are migratory, wintering in Central America south to northern Colombia, with an unconfirmed sighting from as far south as Ecuador; they are also very rare vagrants to western Europe.
0 They arrive in their breeding range in May and depart by mid-September.
1 In the summer, male Chestnut-sided Warblers are unmistakable in appearance.
1 They display dark-streaked gray backs, white faces, black eyestripes and greenish crowns.
1 Their underparts are white, with chestnut flanks, and they also have two white wing bars.
1 The adult females resemble washed-out versions of the summer male, and in particular, the females lack the strong head pattern, and also have less chestnut coloring on their flanks.
1 Non-breeding birds of both sexes have greenish heads, and greenish upperparts which are usually unstreaked.
1 They also have unstreaked pale grey breasts.
1 Their wing bars are always present in their plumages.
1 Their lack of streaking helps to distinguish this species from the Blackpoll Warbler outside the breeding season.
0 The songs are whistled pleased, pleased, pleased to meecha lines.
0 Their calls are harsh chips.
0 The Chestnut-sided Warbler has benefited from the clearing of mature forests.
0 They make use of the abundant second growth habitats.
0 Their cup-shaped nests are placed in a low bush, which is usually located in young deciduous woodland or scrub.
0 These birds lay 3-5 eggs.
0 Their species is frequently parasitized by cowbirds.
0 This bird's numbers have increased as second growth forest became more common in the east in the late 19th century; their numbers have declined slightly since then.
0 Chestnut-sided Warblers are insectivorous, but will include berries in their winter diets.
0 They forage actively in shrubs and small trees, and sometimes will attempt to catch insects in mid-air.