0 The Yellow-browed Warbler is a leaf warbler which breeds in temperate Asia.
0 This warbler is strongly migratory and winters mainly in tropical southeast Asia, but also in small numbers in western Europe.
0 Like the rest of Phylloscopidae, it was formerly included in the Old World warbler assemblage.
0 It was formerly considered to comprise of three subspecies, but P. i. humei and P. i. mandellii are now split as a separate species, Hume's Leaf Warbler P. humei, leaving P. inornatus monotypic.
0 The two sister species differ slightly but consistently in morphology, bioacoustics, and molecular characters.
0 Before the species was split, the names yellow-browed willow warbler and inornate warbler were used by a few authors.
1 This is one of the smaller Old World warblers, at 9.5–11 cm long and weighing 4–9 g distinctly smaller than a Chiffchaff but slightly larger than Pallas's Warbler.
1 Like many other leaf warblers, it has overall greenish upperparts and white underparts.
1 It also has prominent double wing bars formed by yellowish-white tips to the wing covert feathers , yellow-margined tertial feathers, and long yellow supercilium.
1 Some individuals also have a faint paler green central crown stripe though many do not show this.
1 It is not shy, but its arboreal life style makes it difficult to observe.
1 It is almost constantly in motion.
1 Its song is a high pitched medley of whistles; the call is piercing, often disyllabic "tseeweest", strikingly loud for the bird's small size.
1 The only real possibility of confusion is with the similar-looking Hume's Leaf Warbler , which in the limited area of overlap has duller colours, a faint second wing bar and dark legs and lower mandible.
1 Their songs and calls are clearly distinct, with Hume's having a more chirping "chwee" call.
1 It can easily be distinguished from Pallas's Warbler as it does not have the a conspicuous yellow central crown stripe and rump patch shown that species.
1 Like most warblers, it is insectivorous.
0 The nest is built in dense vegetation often at the base of a tree or old stump; two to four eggs are laid, hatching after 11–14 days, with the chicks fledging when 12–13 days old.
0 This is an abundant bird of lowland and montane forests and woodlands; particularly in winter it may also be found in more open woods.
0 Its breeding range extends from just west of the Ural Mountains eastwards to eastern Siberia, Mongolia and northeastern China.
0 Its winter habitat is lowland broadleaf or coniferous forest, from West Bengal and Assam in northeastern India east through southern China to Taiwan, and south to the Malay Peninsula.
0 In summer, it occurs at altitudes of up to 2,440 m, and in winter, up to 1,525 m. The European breeding population west of the Urals has increased westwards in recent decades; in 1950 it was described as 'fairly scarce', but 'locally abundant' with 45,000–46,000 pairs in 1990.
0 Small numbers, most likely from the western end of the breeding range, regularly winter in western Europe.
0 These arrive in Great Britain in late September and October after a 3,000–3,500 km migration from the Urals, a markedly shorter distance than the 5,500–6,000 km they would need to fly to reach the normal wintering areas in southeastern Asia.
0 Exact numbers in this population are unknown, but typically several hundred are found arriving in Great Britain each autumn; given their unobtrusive behaviour, this is probably only a fraction of the total.
0 In the past widely considered to be vagrants, these birds are now thought to be undertaking a normal regular migration, able to take advantage of the mild oceanic climate winters on the western fringes of Europe for wintering.
0 A common species in most of its wide range, the Yellow-browed Warbler is not considered threatened by the IUCN.
0 Hume's Leaf Warbler overlaps its breeding range with Yellow-browed Warbler in the western Sayan Mountains, but the species apparently do not hybridise.
0 Their lineages diverged roughly 2.5 million years ago.