0 The Cedar Waxwing is a member of the family Bombycillidae or waxwing family of passerine birds.
0 It breeds in open wooded areas in North America, principally southern Canada and the northern United States.
1 Cedar waxwings are approximately 6 - 7in long and weigh roughly 30 grams.
1 They are smaller and more brown than their close relative, the Bohemian Waxwing .
1 These birds' most prominent feature is a small cluster of bright red feathers on the wings, a feature they share with the Bohemian Waxwing .
1 The tail is typically yellow or orange depending on diet.
1 Birds that have fed on berries of introduced Eurasian honeysuckles while growing tail feathers will have darker orange-tipped tail-feathers.
1 Adults have a pale yellow belly.
1 Immature birds are streaked on the throat and flanks, and often do not have the black mask of the adults.
1 During courtship the male and female will sit together and pass small objects back and forth, such as flower petals or an insect.
1 Mating pairs will sometimes rub their beaks together affectionately.
1 The flight of waxwings is strong and direct, and the movement of the flock in flight resembles that of a flock of small pale European Starlings.
1 The calls of these birds include very high-pitched whistles and buzzy trills often represented as see or sree.
0 Outside the breeding season, Cedar Waxwings often feed in large flocks numbering hundreds of birds.
0 This species is irruptive, with erratic winter movements, though most of the population migrates farther south into the United States and beyond, sometimes reaching as far as northern South America.
0 They will move in huge numbers if berry supplies are low.
0 Rare vagrants have reached western Europe, and there are two recorded occurrences of Cedar Waxwing sightings in Great Britain.
0 Individual Bohemian Waxwings will occasionally join large winter flocks of Cedar Waxwings.
0 In winter, these birds can be very confident and will come into gardens for berry bushes and trees and to drink from fountains or bird baths.
0 Cedar waxwings fly at 25 miles per hour and fly at an altitude of 2000 ft.
0 The Cedar Waxwing eats berries and sugary fruit year-round, with insects becoming an important part of the diet in the breeding season.
0 Its fondness for the small cones of the Eastern Redcedar gave this bird its common name.
0 When the end of a twig holds a supply of berries that only one bird at a time can reach, members of a flock may line up along the twig and pass berries beak to beak down the line so that each bird gets a chance to eat.
0 Preferred habitat consists of trees at the edge of wooded areas, or "open" forests, especially those that provide access to berry sources as well as water.
0 Waxwings are attracted to the sound of running water, and love to bathe in and drink from shallow creeks.
0 In urban or suburban environments, waxwings often favor parkland with well-spaced trees; golf courses, cemeteries, or other landscaping with well-spaced trees; bushes that provide berries; and a nearby water source such as a fountain or birdbath.
0 The nest is a loose open cup built with grass and twigs, lined with softer materials and supported by a tree branch averaging 2 to 6 meters above ground but, at times, considerably higher.
0 The outer diameter of the nest is approximately 12 cm to 16 cm.
0 During courtship, the pair may pass a flower petal or insect back and forth repeatedly.
0 Usually 5 or 6 eggs are laid and the female incubates them for 12 to 16 days.
0 The eggs are oval shaped with a smooth surface and very little, if any, gloss.
0 The egg shells are of various shades of light or bluish grey with irregular, dark brown spots or greyish-brown splotches.
0 Both parents build the nest and feed the young.
0 Typically, there are two broods during the mating season.
0 Young leave the nest about 14 to 18 days after hatching.
0 Cedar Waxwings are also known as the Southern Waxwing, Canada Robin, Cedar Bird, Cherry Bird, or Recellet.
0 According to experts on the writing of Vladimir Nabokov, this species almost certainly inspired the waxwing mentioned prominently in his novel Pale Fire.
0 Waxwings are evaluated as Least Concern by the IUCN Red List of Endangered Species.