0 The Pileated Woodpecker is a very large North American woodpecker, almost crow-sized, inhabiting deciduous forests in eastern North America, the Great Lakes, the boreal forests of Canada, and parts of the Pacific coast.
0 It is also the largest woodpecker in America.
1 Adults are 40 to 49cm long, and weigh 250 to 350g.
1 They are mainly black with a red crest, and have a white line down the sides of the throat.
1 They show white on the wings in flight.
1 Adult males have a red line from the bill to the throat, in adult females these are black.
1 The only North American birds of similar plumage and size are the Ivory-billed Woodpecker of the Southeastern United States and Cuba, and the related Imperial Woodpecker of Mexico.
1 However, unlike the Pileated, both of those species are extremely rare, if not extinct.
1 Most reports of the Ivory-billed Woodpecker are believed to be erroneous reports of the far more common Pileated.
1 The call is a wild laugh, similar to the Northern Flicker.
1 Its drumming can be very loud, often sounding like someone striking a tree with a hammer.
1 This bird favors mature forests and heavily wooded parks.
0 Their breeding habitat is forested areas with large trees across Canada, the eastern United States and parts of the Pacific coast.
0 These birds mainly eat insects, especially carpenter ants and wood-boring beetle larvae.
0 They also eat fruits, nuts, and berries, including poison ivy berries.
0 They often chip out large and roughly rectangular holes in trees while searching out insects.
0 Pileated Woodpeckers raise their young every year in a hole in a tree.
0 In April the hole made by the male attracts a female for mating and raising their young.
0 Once the brood is raised, the Pileated Woodpeckers abandon the hole and will not use it the next year.
0 When abandoned, these holes—made similarly by all woodpeckers—provide good homes in future years for many forest song birds.
0 Ecologically, the entire woodpecker family is important to the well being of many other bird species.
0 They usually excavate large nests in the cavities of dead trees, thus creating habitat for other large-cavity nesters.
0 A Pileated Woodpecker pair stays together on its territory all year round.
0 It will defend the territory in all seasons, but will tolerate floaters during the winter.
0 The Pileated Woodpecker also nests in nest boxes about 15ft off the ground.
0 Pileated Woodpeckers make such large holes in dead trees that the holes can cause a small tree to break in half.
0 The roost of a Pileated Woodpecker usually has multiple entrance holes.
0 Pileated Woodpeckers have been observed to move to another site any eggs that have fallen out of the nest—a rare habit in birds.
0 The cavity is unlined except for wood chips.
0 "Both parents incubate three to five eggs for 15 or 16 days.
0 The young may take a month to fledge."