0 The Red-bellied Woodpecker, Melanerpes carolinus, is a medium-sized woodpecker of the Picidae family.
0 It breeds in southern Canada and the northeastern United States, ranging as far south as Florida and as far west as Texas.
0 Its common name is somewhat misleading, as the most prominent red part of its plumage is on the head; the Red-headed Woodpecker however is another species that is a rather close relative but looks quite different.
0 It was first described in Linnaeus' Systema Naturae, as Picus carolinus.
0 The type locality is given simply as "America septentrionalis" .
1 Adults are mainly light gray on the face and underparts; they have black and white barred patterns on their back, wings and tail.
1 Adult males have a red headside going from the bill to the nape; females have a red patch on the nape and another above the bill.
1 The reddish tinge on the belly that gives the bird its name is difficult to see in field identification.
1 They are 9 to 10.5 inches long, and have a wingspan of 15 to 18 inches.
1 Red-bellied woodpeckers are noisy birds, and have many varied calls.
1 Calls have been described as sounding like churr-churr-churr or thrraa-thrraa-thrraa with an alternating br-r-r-r-t sound.
1 Males tend to call and drum more frequently than females, but both sexes call.
1 Often, these woodpeckers "drum" to attract mates.
1 They tap on aluminum roofs, metal guttering, hollow trees and even transformer boxes, in urban environments, to communicate with potential partners.
1 Babies have a high-pitched begging call of "pree-pree-pree" They will continue to give a begging call whenever they see their parents for a while after fledging.
1 These birds mainly search out arthropods on tree trunks.
1 They may also catch insects in flight.
1 They are omnivores, eating insects, fruits, nuts and seeds.
1 Their breeding habitat is usually deciduous forests.
1 They nest in the decayed cavities of dead trees, old stumps, or in live trees that have softer wood such as elms, maples, or willows; both sexes assist in digging nesting cavities.
1 Areas around nest sites are marked with drilling holes to warn others away.
1 Though the species is not globally threatened, it depends on large trees for nesting.
1 In areas that are extensively deforested, the birds will sometimes utilize gardens, but for the most part simply will not be present in any numbers.