0 The Least Auklet, Aethia pusilla, is a seabird and the smallest species of auk.
0 It is the most abundant seabird in North America, and one of the most abundant in the world, with a population of around nine million birds.
0 They breed on the islands of Alaska and Siberia, and spend the winter close to the edge of the ice sheet.
0 Their largest colonies are on the Aleutian Islands, St. Lawrence Island and Little Diomede Island.
0 Least Auklets feed predominantly on calanoid copepods, particularly those of the genus Neocalanus.
0 They also eat euphausiids, pteropods and other zooplankton species.
0 They hunt for these in stratified waters caused where upwelling and thermoclines cause these prey items to be tightly clumped together.
0 Like all auks they are pursuit divers, using their wings to provide thrust and "fly" under the water.
0 They are voracious predators, consuming 86% of their body weight each day.
0 Least Auklets are highly colonial, nesting in rocky crevices in colonies of up to a million birds.
0 These colonies are often mixed, with other species of auklet nesting with, and competing with the Least Auklets.
0 While this coexistence with other species may bring the benefits of protection from predators, Least Auklets are vulnerable to being displaced from their nesting sites by the larger Crested Auklets.
1 A single egg is laid in the crevice and incubated for a month, after which a semi-precocial black downy chick is hatched.
0 Both parents share incubation duties, as well as brooding and feeding duties.
0 Unlike many auks, which are fed fish carried crosswise in the bill, chicks of the Least Auklet are fed copepods and other zooplankton from a sublingual pouch, as are other small auklets.
0 The chicks receive no further parental care after they fledge, and can dive to hunt as soon as they leave the nest.
0 Least Auklets are vulnerable to oil spills and introduced species.
0 The introduction of Arctic Foxes to many of the Aleutian Islands caused the species to be wiped out on many of those islands, and rats are also a problem on many islands.
0 However, at present they are still a very common species.