1 The Rusty Blackbird, Euphagus carolinus, is a medium-sized blackbird, closely related to grackles .
1 Adults have a pointed bill and a pale yellow eye.
1 They have black plumage; the female is greyer.
1 "Rusty" refers to the brownish winter plumage.
1 They resemble the western member of the same genus, the Brewer's Blackbird; however, this bird has a longer bill and the male's head is iridescent green.
0 Their breeding habitat is wet temperate coniferous forests and muskeg across Canada and Alaska.
0 The cup nest is located in a tree or dense shrub, usually over water.
0 Birds often nest at the edge of ponds/wetland complexes and travel large distances to feed at the waters edge.
0 Emerging dragonflies and their larvae are important food items during the summer.
0 These birds migrate to the eastern and southeastern United States, into parts of the Grain Belt, sometimes straying into Mexico.
0 They forage on wet ground or in shallow water, mainly eating insects, small fish and some seeds.
0 Their most common mode of foraging is to vigorously flip leaves and rip at submerged aquatic vegetation.
0 The mast of small-acorn producing oaks, such as Willow Oak, is also important.
0 In some areas, the nuts of planted pecans are heavily used.
0 They very rarely will attack small passerine birds, and have been known to kill species as large as Common Snipe.
0 They feed in flocks during migration and on the wintering grounds, sometimes joining other blackbirds, both often occurring in single species flocks.
0 They more often roost with other blackbirds; some small roosts are in brushy vegetation in old fields and others are in massive mixed flocks—sometimes in the urban areas.
0 The species nests relatively early for a boreal forest bird.
0 They linger in the boreal zone to complete their molt.
0 Their autumn migration is slow, with birds often remaining in the northern states well into December; spring migration is much more rapid.
0 The largest wintering concentrations are found in the lower Mississippi Valley, with smaller concentrations in the Piedmont and south Atlantic coastal plain.
0 Fairly quiet in fall migration and most of the winter, both males and females will sing in the late winter and spring.
0 The song consists of gurgling and high-pitched squeaks.
0 Rusty Blackbirds have declined significantly in recent decades.
0 The reasons are unclear, but habitat loss is likely a major contributor to the decline.
0 Mercury contamination may be a problem for populations in northeastern North America.
0 Rarer than previously believed, it is uplisted from a species of Least Concern to Vulnerable status in the 2007 IUCN Red List.
0 Additionally, citizen science projects such as the North American Breeding Bird Survey and Christmas Bird Count have determined that Rusty Blackbirds have dropped 85%–98% in the past 40 years.
0 This is very worrisome for many people, as scientists are desperately trying to figure out what exactly went wrong.
0 Sighting submission services such as eBird are encouraging birders to keep track of Rusty Blackbirds.
0 The Rusty Blackbird Technical Working group has been actively coordinating and conducting research on this species since 2005