0 The Bobolink is a small New World blackbird and the only member of genus Dolichonyx.
1 Adults are 16–18 cm long with short finch-like bills.
0 They weigh about 1oz.
1 Adult males are mostly black, although they do display creamy napes, and white scapulars, lower backs and rumps.
1 Adult females are mostly light brown, although their coloring includes black streaks on the back and flanks, and dark stripes on the head; their wings and tails are darker.
0 The collective name for a group of bobolinks is a chain.
0 These birds migrate to Argentina, Bolivia and Paraguay.
0 One bird was tracked flying 12000mi over the course of the year, and up to 1100mi in one day.
0 They often migrate in flocks, feeding on cultivated grains and rice, which leads to them being considered a pest by farmers in some areas.
0 Although Bobolinks migrate long distances, they have rarely been sighted in Europe—like many vagrants from the Americas, the overwhelming majority of records are from the British Isles.
0 Each fall, Bobolinks gather in large numbers in South American rice fields, where they are inclined to eat grain.
0 This has earned them the name "ricebird" in these parts.
0 However, they are called something entirely different in Jamaica where they are collected as food, being that they are very fat as they pass through on migration.
0 Their breeding habitats are open grassy fields, especially hay fields, across North America.
0 In high-quality habitats, males are often polygynous.
0 Females lay 5 to 6 eggs in a cup-shaped nest, which is always situated on the ground and is usually well-hidden in dense vegetation.
0 Both parents feed the young.
0 Bobolinks forage on, or near the ground, and mainly eat seeds and insects.
0 Males sing bright, bubbly songs in flight; these songs gave this species its common name.
0 The numbers of these birds are declining due to loss of habitat.
0 In Vermont, a 75% decline was noted between 1966 to 2007.
0 Originally, they were found in tall grass prairie and other open areas with dense grass.
0 Although hay fields are suitable nesting habitat, fields which are harvested early, or at multiple times, in a season may not allow sufficient time for young birds to fledge.
0 This species increased in numbers when horses were the primary mode of transportation, requiring larger supplies of hay.
0 Emily Dickinson penned many poems about the bird The bobolink is also mentioned in the song Evelina by Harold Arlen and Yip Harburg, from the musical Bloomer Girl: The bobolink is also one of the many important ornithological references in Vladimir Nabokov's John Shade's poem "Pale Fire" in the novel of the same name: Sophia Jewett ends her poem "An Exile's Garden" with a reference to a bobolink: