0 The Shiny Cowbird, Molothrus bonariensis, is a passerine bird in the New World family Icteridae.
0 It breeds in most of South America apart from the most dense jungles, mountains and deserts , the coldest southernmost regions , and on Trinidad and Tobago.
0 It has relatively recently colonised Chile and many Caribbean islands, and has reached the USA, where it is probably breeding in southern Florida.
0 Northern and southernmost populations are partially migratory.
0 It is a bird associated with open woodland and cultivation.
0 The male’s song is a purr and whistle, purr purr purrte-tseeeee.
0 The male’s call is a sharp whistled tsee-tsee, but the female makes a harsh rattle.
0 Like most other cowbirds, it is a brood parasite, laying its eggs in the nests of many other bird species, such as the Rufous-collared Sparrow and the Masked Water-tyrant.
0 The eggs are of two types, either whitish and unspotted, or pale blue or green with dark spots and blotches.
0 The host’s eggs are sometimes removed, and if food is short their chicks may starve, but larger host species are less affected.
0 The incubation period of 11–12 days is shorter than that of most hosts.
0 Extermination of the Shiny Cowbird within the tiny range of the Pale-headed Brush-finch has resulted in a population increase in this critically endangered species.
1 The male Shiny Cowbird is 20.3 cm long, weighs 45 g and is all black with an iridescent purple-blue gloss.
1 The smaller female is 19 cm long and weighs 31 g. Her plumage is dark brown, paler on the underparts.
1 She can be distinguished from the female Brown-headed Cowbird by her longer, finer bill, pale superciilium and stronger face pattern.
1 There is an all-black plumage variation, and the northern subspecies M. b. cabanisii of Panama and northern Colombia is paler than the nominate M. b. bonariensis.
1 Juveniles are like the female but more streaked below.
0 This abundant and gregarious bird feeds mainly on insects and some seeds, including rice, and forages on the ground or perches on cattle.
0 --> 