0 The Brown Creeper , also known as the American Tree Creeper, is a small songbird, the only North American member of the treecreeper family Certhiidae.
1 Adults are brown on the upperparts with light spotting, resembling a piece of tree bark, with white underparts.
1 They have a long thin bill with a slight downward curve and a long tail.
1 The male creeper has a slightly larger bill than the female.
1 The Brown creeper is 11.7-13.5 cm long .
0 Their breeding habitat is mature forests, especially conifers, in Canada, Alaska and the northeastern and western United States.
0 They are permanent residents through much of their range; many northern birds migrate farther south to the United States.
0 As with many of Washington's birds, the Cascades divided this species into two subspecies.
0 The species has declined in much of North America but appears to be doing well in Washington, with a small increase on the state's breeding bird survey since 1966.
0 They forage on tree trunks and branches, typically spiraling upwards from the bottom of a tree trunk, and then flying down to the bottom of another tree.
0 They creep slowly with their body flattened against the bark, probing with their beak for insects.
0 They will rarely feed on the ground.
0 They mainly eat small arthropods found in the bark, but sometimes they will eat seeds in winter.
0 Breeding season typically begins in April.
0 The female will make a partial cup nest either under a piece of bark partially detached from the tree, or in a tree cavity.
0 It will lay 3-7 eggs, and incubation lasts approximately two weeks.
0 Both of the parents help feed the chicks.
0 The song is a short series of high-pitched sees.
0 As a migratory species with a northern range, this species is a conceivable vagrant to western Europe.
0 However, it is intermediate in its characteristics between Common Treecreeper and Short-toed Treecreeper, and has sometimes in the past been considered a subspecies of the former, although its closest relative seems to be the latter .
0 Brown creepers prefer mature, moist, coniferous forests or mixed coniferous/ deciduous forests.
0 They are found in drier forests as well, including Engelman spruce and larch forest in eastern Washington.
0 They generally avoid the rainforest of the outer coast.
0 While they generally nest in hardwoods, conifers are preferred for foraging.
0 Since the two European treecreepers are themselves among the most difficult species on that continent to distinguish from each other, a Brown Creeper would probably not even be suspected, other than on a treeless western island, and would be difficult to verify even then.
0 Brown Creeper has occurred as a vagrant to Bermuda and Central America's mountains in Guatemala, Honduras and the northern cordillera of El Salvador.