1 The Northern Flicker is a medium-sized member of the woodpecker family.
0 It is native to most of North America, parts of Central America, Cuba, the Cayman Islands, and is one of the few woodpecker species that migrate.
0 There are over 100 common names for the Northern Flicker.
0 Among them are: Yellowhammer, clape, gaffer woodpecker, harry-wicket, heigh-ho, wake-up, walk-up, wick-up, yarrup, and gawker bird.
0 Many of these names are attempts at imitating some of its calls.
0 The Northern Flicker is part of the genus Colaptes which encompasses 12 New-World woodpeckers.
0 There are two living and one extinct subspecies of C. auratus species.
0 The existing sub-species were at one time considered separate species but they commonly interbreed where ranges overlap and are now considered one species by the American Ornithologists Union.
0 Whether or not they are separate species is a well-known example of the species problem.
1 Adults are brown with black bars on the back and wings.
0 A mid-to-large-sized woodpecker, it measures 28-36cm in length and 42-54cm in wingspan.
0 The body mass can vary from 92 to 167g.
1 A necklace-like black patch occupies the upper breast, while the lower breast and belly are beige with black spots.
1 Males can be identified by a black or red moustachial stripe at the base of the beak.
1 The tail is dark on top, transitioning to a white rump which is conspicuous in flight.
0 The subspecies plumage varies as described in Taxonomy section.
0 This bird's call is a sustained laugh, ki ki ki ki ..., more congenial than that of the Pileated Woodpecker.
0 One may also hear a constant knocking as they often drum on trees or even metal objects to declare territory.
0 Like most woodpeckers, Northern Flickers drum on objects as a form of communication and territory defense.
0 In such cases, the object is to make as loud a noise as possible, and that’s why woodpeckers sometimes drum on metal objects.
0 One Northern Flicker in Wyoming could be heard drumming on an abandoned tractor from a half-mile away.
0 Like many woodpeckers, its flight is undulating.
0 The repeated cycle of a quick succession of flaps followed by a pause creates an effect comparable to a rollercoaster.
0 According to the Audubon guide, "flickers are the only woodpeckers that frequently feed on the ground", probing with their beak, also sometimes catching insects in flight.
0 Although they eat fruits, berries, seeds and nuts, their primary food is insects.
0 Ants alone can make up 45% of their diet.
0 Other invertebrates eaten include flies, butterflies, moths, beetles, and snails.
0 Flickers also eat berries and seeds, especially in winter, including poison oak and ivy, dogwood, sumac, wild cherry and grape, bayberries, hackberries, and elderberries, and sunflower and thistle seeds.
0 Flickers often go after ants underground , hammering at the soil the way other woodpeckers drill into wood.
0 They’ve been seen breaking into cow patties to eat insects living within.
0 Their tongues can dart out 2 inches beyond the end of the bill to snare prey.
0 As well as eating ants, flickers have a behavior called anting, during which they use the acid from the ants to assist in preening, as it is useful in keeping them free of parasites.
0 Look for flickers in open habitats near trees, including woodlands, edges, yards, and parks.
0 In the West you can find them in mountain forests all the way up to treeline.
0 Northern Flickers generally nest in holes in trees like other woodpeckers.
0 Occasionally, they’ve been found nesting in old, earthen burrows vacated by Belted Kingfishers or Bank Swallows.
0 Both sexes help with nest excavation.
0 The entrance hole is about 3 inches in diameter, and the cavity is 13-16 inches deep.
0 The cavity widens at bottom to make room for eggs and the incubating adult.
0 Inside, the cavity is bare except for a bed of wood chips for the eggs and chicks to rest on.
0 Once nestlings are about 17 days old, they begin clinging to the cavity wall rather than lying on the floor.
0 The oldest known "yellow-shafted" Northern Flicker lived to be at least 9 years 2 months old, and the oldest “red-shafted” Northern Flicker lived to be at least 8 years 9 months old.
0 Their breeding habitat consists of forested areas across North America and as far south as Central America.
0 They are cavity nesters who typically nest in trees though they will also use posts and birdhouses if sized and situated appropriately.
0 They prefer to excavate their own home though they will reuse and repair damaged or abandoned nests.
0 Abandoned flicker nests create habitat for other cavity nesters.
0 Flickers are sometimes driven from nesting sites by another cavity nester, European starlings.
0 It takes about 1 to 2 weeks to build the nest which is built by both sexes of the mating pairs.
0 The entrance hole is roughly 5 cm to 10 cm wide.
0 A typical clutch consists of 6 to 8 eggs whose shells are pure white with a smooth surface and high gloss.
0 The eggs are the second largest of the North American woodpecker species, exceeded only by the Pileated Woodpecker's.
0 Incubation is by both sexes for approximately 11 to 12 days.
0 The young are fed by regurgitation and fledge about 25 to 28 days after hatching.
0 Northern birds migrate to the southern parts of the range; southern birds are often permanent residents.