1 Anna's Hummingbird is 3.9 to 4.3 inches long.
1 It has a bronze-green back, a pale grey chest and belly, and green flanks.
1 Its bill is long, straight and slender.
1 The adult male has an iridescent crimson-red crown and throat, and a dark, slightly forked tail.
1 Anna's is the only North American hummingbird species with a red crown.
1 Females and juveniles have a green crown, a grey throat with some red markings, a grey chest and belly, and a dark, rounded tail with white tips on the outer feathers.
0 These birds feed on nectar from flowers using a long extendable tongue.
0 They also consume small insects caught in flight.
0 A PBS documentary that first aired January 10, 2010, shows how Anna's Hummingbirds eat flying insects .
0 They aim for the flying insect, then open their beaks very wide.
0 That technique has a greater success rate than trying to aim the end of a long beak at the insect.
0 While collecting nectar, they also assist in plant pollination.
0 This species sometimes consumes tree sap.
0 Open-wooded or shrubby areas and mountain meadows along the Pacific coast from British Columbia to Arizona make up C. anna's breeding habitat.
0 The female raises the young without the assistance of the male.
0 The female bird builds a large nest in a shrub or tree, or in vines or on wires.
0 The round, 3.8 to 5.1cm diameter nest is built of very small twigs, lichen and other mosses, and often lined with downy feathers or animal hair.
0 The nest materials are bound together with spider silk or other sticky materials.
0 They are known to nest early as mid-December and as late as June.
0 Unlike most hummingbirds, the male Anna's Hummingbird sings during courtship.
0 The song is thin and squeaky.
0 During the breeding season, males can be observed performing a remarkable display, called a display dive, on their territories.
0 When a female flies onto a male's territory, he rises up approximately 30m before diving over the recipient.
0 As he approaches the bottom of the dive the males reach an average speed of 27 m/s, which is 385 body lengths per second.
0 At the bottom of the dive the male travels 23m/s, and produces a loud sound described by some as an "explosive squeak" with their outer tail-feathers.
0 Anna's Hummingbirds will sometimes hybridize with other species, but this is not very common.
0 These natural hybrids have been mistaken for new species.
0 A bird, allegedly collected in Bolaños, Mexico, was described and named Selasphorus floresii , or Floresi's Hummingbird.
0 Several more specimens were collected in California over a long period, and the species was considered extremely rare.
0 It was later determined that the specimens were the hybrid offspring of an Anna's Hummingbird and an Allen's Hummingbird.
0 A single bird collected in Santa Barbara, California, was described and named Trochilus violajugulum , or Violet-throated Hummingbird.
0 It was later determined to be a hybrid between an Anna's Hummingbird and a Black-chinned Hummingbird.
0 Anna's Hummingbirds are found along the western coast of North America, from southern Canada to northern Baja California, and inland to southern Arizona.
0 They tend to be permanent residents within their range, and are very territorial.
0 However, birds have been spotted far outside their range in such places as southern Alaska, Saskatchewan, New York, Florida, Louisiana and Newfoundland.
0 Anna's hummingbirds are the only hummingbirds to spend the winter in northern climates; they are able to do this as there are enough winter flowers and food to support them.
0 During cold temperatures, Anna's Hummingbirds gradually gain weight during the day as they convert sugar to fat.
0 In addition, hummingbirds with inadequate stores of body fat or insufficient plumage are able to survive periods of sub-freezing weather by lowering their metabolic rate and entering a state of torpor.
0 There are an estimated 1.5 million Anna's Hummingbirds.
0 Their population appears to be stable, and they are not considered an endangered species.