0 The Green Jay is a bird species of the New World jays, which exhibits distinct regional variations within its large but discontinuous range.
0 This stretches from southern Texas south into Mexico and Central America, with a break before the species reappears in a broad sweep across the highlands of South America in Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia.
0 It has been suggested that the North American taxa should be considered separate species, Cyanocorax luxuosus.
0 If following this taxonomy, the northern species retains the common name Green Jay, while the South American population, which retains the scientific name C. yncas, is renamed the Inca Jay.
1 The Green Jays of the Northern population are smaller, at 25–29 cm , than the South American birds, at 29.5-34.3 cm .
1 Weight ranges from 66 to 110 grams .
1 They have feathers of yellowish-white with blue tips on the top of the head, cheeks and nape, though some taxa have more blue than others.
1 In South American populations, the crown can appear almost entirely white, with less extensive blue, and there's a prominent black crest behind the bill.
1 A black bib forms a thick band up to the sides of the head as well as a stripe through the eye line and one above it.
1 The breast and underparts typically are bright to dull yellow, or strongly green-tinged in the far northernmost part of its range.
1 The upper parts are rich green.
1 It has large nasal bristles that form a distinct tuft in some subspecies, but are less developed in others.
1 The color of the iris ranges from dark brownish to bright yellow depending on the subspecies.
0 Green Jays feed on a wide range of insects and other invertebrates and various cereal grains.
0 They take ebony seeds where these occur, and also any oak species' acorns, which they will cache.
0 Meat and human scraps add to the diet when opportunity arises.
0 Green Jays have been observed using sticks as tools to extract insects from tree bark.
0 Green Jays usually build a nest in a tree or in a thorny bush or thicket, and the female lays three to five eggs.
0 Only the female incubates, but both parents take care of the young.
0 In Colombia, the Green Jay is recorded as retaining offspring for several years, and those young help the parents raise more chicks.
0 As with most of the typical jays, this species has a very extensive voice repertoire.
0 The bird's most common call makes a rassh-rassh-rassh sound, but many other unusual notes also occur.
0 One of the most distinctive calls sounds like an alarm bell.
0 Their basic diet consists of arthropods, vertebrates, seeds, and fruit.