1 The Buff-bellied Pipit , or American Pipit as it is known in North America, is a small songbird found on both sides of the northern Pacific.
0 It was first described by Marmaduke Tunstall in his 1771 Ornithologia Britannica.
0 It was formerly classified as a form of the Water Pipit.
0 Like most other pipits, the Buff-bellied Pipit is an undistinguished-looking species which usually can be seen to run around on the ground.
1 The American Pipit has lightly streaked grey-brown upperparts and is diffusely streaked below on the buff breast and flanks.
1 The belly is whitish, the bill and legs are dark.
1 The Japanese Pipit is darker above and has bolder black streaking on its whiter underparts; its legs have a reddish hue.
0 The call is a squeaky sip.
0 It has two distinctive subspecies, but morphological and DNA sequence differences between them are rather pronounced and they might be considered distinct species pending further research: A. r. rubescens , American Pipit breeds in northern North America, extending further south in mountainous areas A. r. japonicus, Japanese Pipit or Siberian Pipit breeds in most of eastern temperate Asia
0 This species is closely related to Rock Pipit and Water Pipit , all three forms having previously been considered conspecific.
0 They can differentiated by their vocalizations and some visual cues, but Rock and Buff-bellied Pipit are not found sympatrically except as vagrant individuals, and the ranges of Buff-bellied and Water Pipits overlap only in a small area in Central Asia.
0 Both subspecies of the Buff-bellied Pipit are migratory.
0 The American Pipit winters on the Pacific coast of North America, and on the Atlantic coast from the southern USA to Central America.
0 At least regarding the American Pipit, its wintering range seems to have expanded northwards in the 20th century and the birds seem to spend less time in winter quarters: in northern Ohio for example, the species was recorded as "not common" during migration in May and September/October in the 1900s, but today it is considered a "widespread migrant" in that region, found between March and May and from late September to November, with many birds actually wintering this far north.
0 Asian birds winter mainly from Pakistan east to and Southeast Asia, with occasional birds found as far north as Yunnan and some in Japan apparently being all-year residents or migrating but a little.
0 The American and Asian subspecies are rare vagrants to Western and Eastern Europe, respectively.
0 Like its relatives, this species is insectivorous.
0 The breeding habitat of Buff-bellied Pipit is tundra, but outside the breeding season it is found in open lightly vegetated areas, similar to those favoured by the Water Pipit .
0 It is a widespread and common species and not considered threatened by the IUCN.