0 The American Redstart is a New World warbler.
0 It is the only member of its genus and is unrelated to the Old World redstarts.
1 It derives its name from the male's red tail, start being an old word for tail.
1 The American Redstart is 12 cm long and weighs 8.5 g. The breeding males are unmistakable, jet black above apart from large orange-red patches on their wings and tails.
1 Their breast sides are also orange, with the rest of their underparts colored white.
1 In their other plumages, American Redstarts display green in their upperparts, along with black central tails and grey heads.
1 The orange patches of the breeding males are replaced by yellow in the plumages of the females and young birds.
0 Their song is a series of musical see notes.
0 Their call is a soft chip.
0 They breed in North America, across southern Canada and the eastern USA.
0 These birds are migratory, wintering in Central America, the West Indies, and northern South America .
0 They are very rare vagrants to western Europe.
0 The breeding habitats of the redstarts are open woodlands or scrub, often located near water.
0 They nest in the lower part of a bush, laying 2-5 eggs in a neat cup-shaped nest.
0 American redstarts display a mixed mating strategy; they are predominantly monogamous but around 25% of males maintain multiple territories and are polygynous.
0 Even within monogamous pairs, a high proportion of offspring - as many as 40% - are not fathered by the male of the pair.
0 The intensity of the males' coloration predicts their success at holding territory in their non-breeding, winter locations in the Caribbean, the probability that they will be polygynous, and the proportion of offspring in their nests that they will themselves father.
0 The redstarts feed on insects which are usually caught by flycatching.
0 American Redstarts also have been known to catch their insect prey by gleaning it from leaves.
0 This is a very active species.
0 The tail is often held partly fanned out.
1 These birds have been observed flashing the orange and yellow of their tails, on and off, to startle and chase insects from the underbrush.