1 The Black Tern, Chlidonias niger, is a small tern generally found in or near inland water in Europe and North America.
1 As its name suggests, it has predominantly dark plumage.
1 Adult are 25 cm long, with a wing span 6/1 cm , and weigh 62 g .
1 They have short dark legs and a short, weak-looking black bill, measuring 27–28 mm, nearly as long as the head.
1 The bill is long, slender, and looks slightly decurved.
1 They have a dark grey back, with a white forehead, black head, neck and belly, black or blackish-brown cap , and a light brownish-grey, 'square' tail.
1 The face is white.
1 There is a big dark triangular patch in front of the eye, and a broadish white collar in juveniles.
1 There are grayish-brown smudges on the ides of the white breast, a downwards extension of the plumage of the upperparts.
0 These marks vary in size and are not conspicuous.
1 In non-breeding plumage, most of the black, apart from the cap, is replaced by grey.
1 The plumage of the upperparts is drab, with pale feather-edgings.
1 The rump is brownish-gray.
0 The North American race, C. n. surinamensis, is distinguishable from the European form in all plumages, and is considered by some to be a separate species.
1 In flight, the build appears slim.
0 The wing-beats are full and dynamic, and flight is often erratic as it dives to the surface for food; similar to other tern species.
0 Hybridisation between this species and White-winged Black Tern has been recorded from Sweden and the Netherlands.
1 Two juvenile birds at Chew Valley Lake, England, in September 1978 and September 1981, were also believed to be hybrids; they showed mixed characters of the two species, specifically a combination of a dark mantle with dark patches on the breast-side .
0 Their breeding habitat is freshwater marshes across most of Canada, the northern United States and much of Europe and western Asia.
0 They usually nest either on floating material in a marsh or on the ground very close to water, laying 2-4 eggs.