1 The White-eyed Vireo, Vireo griseus, is a small songbird.
0 It breeds in the southeastern USA from New Jersey west to northern Missouri and south to Texas and Florida, and also in eastern Mexico, northern Central America, Cuba and the Bahamas.
0 Populations on the US Gulf coast and further south are resident, but most North American birds migrate south in winter.
0 This vireo frequents bushes and shrubs in abandoned cultivation or overgrown pastures.
0 The grass-lined nest is a neat cup shape, attached to a fork in a tree branch by spider webs.
0 3-5 dark-spotted white eggs are laid.
0 Both the male and female incubate the eggs for 12 – 16 days.
0 The young leave the nest 9 – 11 days after hatching.
0 The White-eyed Vireo is 13 – 15 cm in length.
1 Its head and back are a greyish olive, and the underparts are white with yellow flanks.
1 The wings and tail are dark, and there are two white wing bars on each wing.
1 The eyes have white irises, and are surrounded by yellow spectacles.
0 Sexes are similar.
0 The White-eyed Vireo's song is a variable and rapid six to seven note phrase, starting and ending with a sharp chick.
0 During the breeding season, the diet of this species consists almost exclusively of insects, primarily caterpillars.
0 In the autumn and winter it supplements its diet of insects with berries.
0 Several subspecies are recognized for the White-eyed Vireo.
0 Geographic ranges for subspecies are not entirely clear.
0 The northern subspecies, V. g. noveboracensis, occupies most of the range of this species and is fully migratory.
1 This sub-species is larger and has more brightly colored plumage than all other subspecies.
1 The resident southeastern coastal plain race, V. g. griseus is a slightly smaller and duller colored subspecies.
0 It does not typically migrate out of its breeding range in the winter.
1 The resident Florida Keys race, V. g. maynardi, is greyer above and whiter below, and the south Texan V. g. micrus is like a smaller maynardi.
0 V. g. bermudianus, is endemic to Bermuda.
1 This has shorter wings and a duller plumage.
0 Along with other endemic and native Bermudian birds, it was threatened with extinction following the loss of 8 million Bermuda cedar trees in the 1940s, and is now quite rare.
0 This species is listed under the Bermuda Protected Species Act 2003.