0 The Prothonotary Warbler is a small songbird of the New World warbler family.
0 It is the only member of the genus Protonotaria.
1 The Prothonotary Warbler is 13 cm long and weighs 12.5 g.
1 It has an olive back with blue-grey wings and tail, yellow underparts, a relatively long pointed bill and black legs.
1 The adult male has a bright orange-yellow head; females and immature birds are duller and have a yellow head.
1 In flight from below, the short, wide tail has a distinctive two-toned pattern that is white at the base and dark at the tip.
0 It breeds in hardwood Swamps in extreme southeastern Ontario and eastern United States.
0 It is the only eastern warbler that nests in natural or artificial cavities, sometimes using old Downy Woodpecker holes.
0 The male often builds several incomplete, unused nests in his territory; the female builds the real nest.
0 It lays 3-7 eggs.
0 It winters in the West Indies, Central America and northern South America.
0 The preferred foraging habitat is dense, woody streams, where the Prothonotary Warbler forages actively in low foliage, mainly for Insects and snails.
0 The song of this bird is a simple, loud, ringing sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet.
0 The call is a loud, dry chip, like that of a Hooded Warbler.
0 Its flight call is a loud seeep.
0 These birds are declining in numbers due to loss of habitat.
0 They are also parasitized by the Brown-headed Cowbird , or outcompeted for nest sites by the House Wren .
0 It is listed as Endangered in Canada.
0 This bird was named after officials in the Roman Catholic Church known as the protonotarii, who wore golden robes.
0 It was once known as the Golden Swamp Warbler.
0 The prothonotary warbler became known in the 1940s as the bird that, in front of the House Un-American Activities Committee, established a connection between Whittaker Chambers and Alger Hiss.
0 Chambers had testified that Hiss enjoyed bird-watching, and once bragged about seeing a prothonotary warbler.
0 Hiss later testified to the same incident, causing many members to become convinced of the pair's acquaintance.