1 The Northern Waterthrush is one of the larger New World warblers.
0 It breeds in the northern part of North America in Canada, and in the northern United States, .
0 This bird is migratory, wintering in Central America, the West Indies, and Florida; also Venezuela, Colombia, and Ecuador.
0 It is a very rare vagrant to western Europe; also other South American countries.
1 The Northern Waterthrush is a large new world warbler with a length of 12–14 cm
1 On the head, the crown is brown with a white supercilium.
1 The bill is pointed and dark.
1 The throat is lightly streaked brown to black with heavier streaking continuing onto the breast and flanks.
1 The back is evenly brown.
0 Sexes are morphologically similar.
1 Young birds have buff, rather than white underparts.
1 The only species which, among bird watchers, causes confusion with the Northern Waterthrush is the closely related Louisiana Waterthrush (Parkesia motacilla, which has buff flanks, a buff undertail, and bright pink legs.
1 The Louisiana Waterthrush also has a whiter throat with fewer streaks.
0 Both waterthrush species walk rather than hop, and seem to teeter, since they bob their rear ends as they move along.
0 On the wintering grounds in Puerto Rico, Northern Waterthrushes leave daytime foraging areas and fly up to 2 kilometers to nighttime roosts.
0 The roosts are often located in red mangrove habitats.
0 Northern Waterthrushes winter in 4 main habitats in Puerto Rico: white mangrove, red mangrove, black mangrove, and scrub.
1 Males, which are larger and migrate earlier in spring, prefer to winter in white mangrove, and are able to maintain or gain weight through the winter.
0 Females winter in the other drier and less food-rich habitats.
1 Waterthrushes wintering red and black mangrove can maintain body weight through the winter but lose weight in scrub.
0 The breeding habitat of the Northern Waterthrush is wet woodlands near water.
0 It nests in a stump or among tree roots, laying three to six eggs, which are cream- or buff-colored, with brown and gray spots.
0 These eggs are laid in a cup nest constructed of leaves, bark strips, and rootlets.
0 The Northern Waterthrush is a terrestrial feeder, eating insects, mollusks, and crustaceans found amongst leaf litter.
0 Its song is a loud swee swee chit chit weedleoo, and its call is a hard chink.