1 The Red-headed Woodpecker, Melanerpes erythrocephalus, is a small or medium-sized woodpecker from temperate North America.
0 Their breeding habitat is open country across southern Canada and the eastern-central United States.
0 The Red-headed Woodpecker was one of the many species originally described by Linnaeus in his 18th-century work Systema Naturae.
0 The specific epithet is derived from the Ancient Greek words erythros 'red' and kephalos 'head'.
1 There are three subspecies recognized: Adults are strikingly tri-colored, with a black back and tail and a red head and neck.
1 Their underparts are mainly white.
1 The wings are black with white secondary remiges.
1 Adult males and females are identical in plumage.
1 Juveniles are similarly shaded, but are mottled with brown.
0 Non-birders may often mistakenly identify Red-bellied Woodpeckers as Red-headeds, whose range overlaps somewhat with that of the Red-headed woodpecker.
1 While red-bellied woodpeckers have some bright red on the backs of their necks and heads, red-headed woodpeckers have a much deeper red that covers their entire heads and necks, as well as a different overall plumage pattern.
1 Both sexes are from 7.5-9.1 inches in length, with a wingspan of 16.5 inches .
1 They weigh 2.0 to 3.2 ounces .
0 They give a tchur-tchur call or drum on territory.
0 These birds fly to catch insects in the air or on the ground, forage on trees or gather and store nuts.
0 They are omnivorous, eating insects, seeds, fruits, berries, nuts, and occasionally even the eggs of other birds.
0 About two thirds of their diet is made up of plants.
0 They nest in a cavity in a dead tree, utility pole, or a dead part of a tree that is between 8 and 80 feet above the ground.
0 They lay four to seven eggs in early May which are incubated for two weeks.
0 Two broods can be raised in a single nesting season.
0 Northern birds migrate to the southern parts of the range, with most having arrived on the breeding range by late April, and having left for winter quarters by late October; southern birds are often permanent residents.
0 Once abundant, populations have seriously declined since 1966 due to increased nest site competition from European Starlings and removal of dead trees from woodlands.
0 Many Northeastern states no longer have nesting red-headed woodpeckers.
0 In Ohio, for example, an irregular population is present in most years, but it is not self-sustaining.
0 The red-headed woodpecker is listed as a vulnerable species in Canada and as a threatened species in some states in the US.
0 The species has declined in numbers due to habitat loss caused by harvesting of snags, agricultural development, channeling of rivers, a decline in farming resulting to regeneration of eastern forests, monoculture crops, the loss of small orchards, and treatment of telephone poles with creosote.
0 Of the 600 Canadian Important Bird Areas only seven report the Red-headed Woodpecker in their area: Cabot Head, Ontario on the Georgian Bay side of the tip of Bruce Peninsula; Carden Plain, Ontario east of Lake Simcoe; Long Point Peninsula and Marshes, Ontario along Lake Eire near London, Ontario; Point Abino, Ontario on Lake Erie near Niagara Falls; Port Franks Forested Dunes, Ontario northeast of Sarnia on Lake Huron; Kinosota/Leifur, Manitoba at the northwest side of Lake Manitoba south of the Narrows and east of Riding Mountain National Park; and along South Saskatchewan River from Empress, Alberta to Lancer Ferry in Saskatchewan.
0 In 1996, the United States Postal Service issued a 2-cent postage stamp depicting a perched red-headed woodpecker.
0 The stamp was discontinued at some time thereafter, but re-issued in 1999 and remained available for purchase until 2006.